Exploring critical fluctuation phenomenon according to net-proton multiplicity information entropy in AMPT model
Jie Pu,∗ Yong-Bo Yu, Kai-Xuan Cheng, Yu-Ting Wang, Ya-Fei Guo, and Chun-Wang Ma†
College of Physics, Henan Normal University, Xinxiang 453007, China
(Dated: March 10, 2023)
Information entropy can be used for investigating the critical fluctuation phenomenon by describing multiplicity fluctuations in heavy-ion collisions. In this study, a multiphase transport (AMPT) model in the default version (AMPT-DEF) and with the string melting (AMPT-SM) were used as event generators to simulate the Au+Au reaction at different incident energies. Owing to the influence of the distribution bin number in extracting its information entropy, two methods, i.e., data binning and weighting factors, were proposed to correct the information entropy analysis. The comparison between information entropy and kurtosis also reflects the necessity to correct the information entropy analysis. The corrected information entropy of net-proton multiplicity was analyzed in central Au+Au collisions at √sNN = 4.7, 6.4, 7.7, 8.8, 11.5, 20, 30, 40, 50, 60, 70, 80, 90, 100, 110, 140, 170, and 200 GeV with the impact parameter b = 3 fm. The results indicated that the fluctuations of net-proton multiplicity were essentially identical at collision energies ranging from √sNN = 4.7 GeV to √sNN = 200 GeV in the same model. No critical fluctuation phenomenon was found in the central Au+Au collisions simulated using the AMPT models, similar to the case of the AMPT model, which does not have. Comparing the information entropy of AMPT-SM to AMPT-DEF, the effect of partonic phase leads to a bigger fluctuation, indicating that the corrected information entropy can be a useful probe to explore the phase transition. The mid-rapidity net-proton multiplicity information entropy was also calculated, and the results led to the same conclusion. The corrected information entropy may be useful for investigating critical fluctuations, which is important for exploring critical endpoints.
 
The exploration of quantum chromodynamics (QCD) critical endpoint (CEP) is one of the most important problems in particle and nuclear physics. A CEP is a possible point or area in the QCD phase diagram from a smooth crossover between the quark and gluon plasma and hadronic matter changes to a first-order phase transition. CEP research is one of the main goals of the Beam Energy Scan (BES) program [1] at the Relativistic Heavy-Ion Collider (RHIC) [2] and has also been planned at the Nuclotron-based Ion Collider Facility (NICA) and the Future Facility for Proton and Ion Research (FAIR). Fluctuations are among the sensitive and observable measurements in heavy-ion collisions (HICs) that can be used to investigate the QCD phase structure of strongly interacting matter [3]. The fluctuation amplitude differs significantly between the hadron and quark gluon plasma phases. For example, the well-known critical opalescence [4] phenomenon is a result of fluctuations due to a second-order phase transition. The critical fluctuation phenomenon can be used for determining the critical point of the phase transition. Therefore, it is important to study the system fluctuations resulting from HICs. Various theoretical studies [5–8] have been performed for determining the CEP, e.g., by using fluctuations of conserved quantities [2, 9, 10], the yield ratio of light nuclei production based on the nucleon coalescence model [11], and the Nambu–Jona–Lasino model with a scalar–vector coupled interaction [12].
 
∗ pujie@htu.edu.cn
† machunwang@126.com
The information entropy from nucleus–nucleus collisions has potential for determination of the QCD CEP [13, 14]. Information entropy was defined by Shannon [15] in information theory. It was originally used to measure information chaoticity carried by messages and has been widely used in the general sciences [16–22] and physics. For example, information entropy has been adopted to study the chaotic behavior of particle production in branching processes [23], intermediate mass fragments [24–26], Higgs boson mass [27], and compact astrophysical systems [28–30]. Because it can measure the chaotic evolution of a system without the thermodynamic physical system limitation, information entropy is appropriately applied to the dynamic evolution of physical systems, regardless of whether the system is discrete, continuous, or discrete/continuous mixed [15].
The multiplicity information entropy is a type of information entropy that was first defined by Y. G. Ma [13, 16] in the context of nuclear reactions to investigate the liquid–gas phase transition in nuclear matter [13] and to search for possible discontinuities in nucleus–nucleus collisions associated with the onset of a QCD phase transition [14]. Recently, Shannon information entropy has been used to study the time evolution process in relativistic HICs and has been proven to be an effective tool [31]. These studies indicated that multiplicity information entropy can be used to judge the fluctuation of the particle multiplicity distribution. It is important to study the fluctuations of conserved quantities, such as net baryon (B), net charge (Q), and net strangeness (S), because they have been predicted to be sensitive to the QCD phase transition and QCD critical point. Additionally, it is worthwhile to study the multiplicity information entropy of net-baryon distributions, such as net-proton distributions, for investigating the critical fluctuation phenomenon.
It can be used for characterizing critical fluctuations with non-monotonic multiplicity distribution information entropy. Because the value of information entropy is affected by many factors, such as the bin number of the distribution, the probability of each bin, and the state of the distribution, it is necessary to retain only the particle distribution fluctuation information entropy and reduce the effects of other factors.
With this motivation, we examined the factors influencing information entropy and developed two methods for correcting the multiplicity information entropy.
Using a multiphase transport (AMPT) model [32, 33], the net-proton multiplicity information entropy was calculated to study the fluctuation evolution for investigating the critical fluctuation phenomenon. The AMPT model [32, 33] was developed to study high-energy HICs at the Super Proton Synchrotron (SPS) and RHIC and even higher-energy HICs at the Large Hadron Collider (LHC). The AMPT model addresses nonequilibrium many-body dynamics that involve both initial partonic and final hadronic interactions as well as the transition between these two phases of matter [34–38]. It is available in two versions: string melting (AMPT-SM) and default (AMPT-DEF). Both versions consist mainly of four components—the initial conditions, partonic interactions, conversion from partonic to hadronic matter, and hadronic interactions—but differ in hadronation. In these four components, the Heavy-Ion Jet Interaction Generator (HIJING) is used to generate the initial conditions, Zhang’s parton cascade is used to model partonic scatterings, the Lund string fragmentation model (for AMPT-DEF) or a quark coalescence model (for AMPTSM) is used for hadronization, and finally a relativistic transport (ART) model is used for treating hadronic scattering. Since there is a partonic phase in the AMPT-SM, but not in the AMPT-DEF, the difference of information entropy can reflect the effect of the partonic phase on the information entropy. In this study, both AMPTSM (Version 2.26t7) and AMPT-DEF (Version 2.26t7) were selected to simulate Au+Au central collisions with an impact parameter of b = 3 fm at √sNN = 4.7, 6.4,
7.7, 8.8, 11.5, 20, 30, 40, 50, 60, 70, 80, 90, 100, 110, 140, 170, and 200 GeV. The number of events in the simulation was 100000 at each version, and the event-by-event net-proton multiplicity distributions were analyzed.
Information entropy [16] is defined by Shannon’s information theory, which has a similar form to thermal entropy. It was originally used to describe the amount of information contained in messages sent in a communication system. For the message space, the Shannon information entropy is defined as
N
	H = −∑pi ln(pi),	(1)
i=1
where  . In an HIC, the information entropy of the particle multiplicity distribution, such as the charged-particle multiplicity and strange-particle multiplicity, can be used to investigate phase transitions [13]. pi is defined as the event probability of having i particles produced in the event space. In addition,{ } ∑i pi is considered over the entire pi distribution. The pi distribution may be an average, random, or Gaussian-like distribution.
The pi distribution significantly affects in the information entropy. The number of bins N and the fluctuation of pi are two important factors affecting the multiplicity information entropy in mathematics. The factor bin
 
FIG. 1. Schematic of the event probability distribution.
number N can be discussed when pi is fixed. If a different i corresponds to the same pi value, , that is, the average distribution. A schematic of this situation is shown in Fig. 1 (a1) and (a2). The value of N is the bin number of the pi distribution, and the information entropy can be simplified to lnN. In Fig. 1 (a1), the bin number is 4; thus, N = 4, and we can easily obtain   and H = ln4 = 1.386. In Fig. 1 (a2), the bin number is 8; thus, , and H = ln8 = 2.079.
It is clear that the information entropy increases with the bin number N in mathematics. In summary, information entropy is related only to the bin number N when pi is fixed. The information entropy of the average-distributed pi can be used as a criterion to reduce the influence of the bin number.
Another situation is induced by the uncertainty in pi when N is fixed. As shown in Figs. 1 (b1) and (b2), the numbers of bins are the same (N = 4), but the pi values are different. The fluctuations in pi in Fig. 1 (b1) are larger, but the value of the information entropy is smaller. This indicates that the information entropy increases as the degree of pi fluctuation decreases, and it is maximized when pi is distributed, on average. This is consistent with the theory of thermal entropy [39]. In this case, the probability pi fluctuation and the system chaoticity, which is quantitatively defined by the information entropy [16] of a distribution, are unified under the determined bin-number restriction. Thus, the information entropy can be used to judge the fluctuation of two distributions that have the same number of bins.
From Figs. 1 (a1), (a2), (b1) and (b2), it is easy to understand that the number of bins N and the fluctuation of the pi distribution are two important factors affecting the multiplicity information entropy in HICs. However, the question arises as to whether this large information entropy (1.743) is caused by the bin number N or the fluctuation of the probability pi when we compare the information entropy of Figs. 1 (c1) (N = 4) and (c2) (N = 6). When the N and pi distributions differ, the information entropy cannot be directly used to judge the fluctuations of these two distributions, and correction is needed to accurately determine the information entropy. Therefore, the bin number of a distribution can be changed when the change in the number of bins does not affect its physical significance. For example, if the bin number does not affect the physical significance of the distribution, as shown in Figs. 1 (c1) and (c2), the fluctuations of these two distributions can be compared using information entropy by redistributing the number of bins to N = 4 in Fig. 1 (c2).
In this study, two methods, i.e., the data binning (DB) and weighting factor (WF) methods, are proposed to correct the information entropy of different distributions. First, the DB method is introduced. DB is a common operation in continuous data preprocessing, and its purpose is typically to enhance data stability and reduce the risk of overfitting [40]. For developing the potential of information entropy in describing the fluctuation of the net-proton distribution, the DB method has been used to redistribute the net-proton distributions to eliminate the influence of the bin number. This can be used to redistribute the histogram and change the bin number into any standard number. For example, the number of bins
 
FIG. 2. Schematic of the DB process.
in the distribution shown in Fig. 1 (c2) can be changed from N = 7 to N = 4. The DB process redistributes the histogram according to the area criteria and changes the bin number to four ( Fig. 2). Subsequently, the influence of the bin number on a set of distributions can be unified into one standard after the binning process, and their information entropy is comparable in terms of multiplicity fluctuation. The premise of this method is that the number of bins cannot affect the physical significance of the distribution.
In the WF method, the information entropy of each distribution is multiplied by a WF to unify the influence of the bin number. The corrected information entropy can be expressed as
	HWF = rHHN,	(2)
where HWF and HN represent the corrected and original information entropies, respectively, in a distribution with bin number   is defined as the information entropy WF, where  represents the standard information entropy of a selected average distribution with bin number S and HNaverage represents the information entropy in the average distribution with bin number N. The WF generated by the average distribution also has the effect of unifying the influence of the bin number, which will be discussed later.
The factors of information entropy can be analyzed using net-proton distribution data from the AMPT model. The number of net protons in this study was equal to the number of protons minus the number of antiprotons. Both the DB and WF methods were used to reduce the influence of the bin number on the multiplicity information entropy of the normalized net-proton distributions. Figure 3 shows the original event-by-event normalized
 
FIG. 3. Net-proton multiplicity distribution simulated using the AMPT model (solid squares for AMPT-SM, open squares for AMPT-DEF) and corrected by the DB method (solid circles for AMPT-SM, open circles for AMPT-DEF) at different energies in central Au+Au collisions with impact parameter b =3 fm.
distributions of net protons for Au+Au collisions with the impact parameter b = 3 fm at different energies. The abscissa indicates the number of particles i, and the ordinate indicates the ratio of the corresponding number of events to the total number of events, that is, the event probability of having i particles (corresponding to pi in Equation 1). The original net-proton multiplicity distributions have different numbers of bins at different energies in the two versions, such as bin number N = 61 at
 
FIG. 4. Number of bins N of the net-proton distribution as a function of the collision energy in central Au+Au collisions based on the AMPT simulation with impact parameter b =3 fm (solid circles for AMPT-SM and open circles for AMPTDEF).
√sNN = 4.7 GeV and N = 100 at √sNN = 200 GeV in the AMPT-SM. The number of bins N is determined via counting, as shown in Fig. 4. The value of N increases almost linearly with an increase in the collision energy. The net-proton multiplicity distributions are not average-distributed but have Gaussian-like distributions.
Therefore, some correction is required when information entropy is used to judge the fluctuation of net-proton multiplicity distributions.
 
FIG. 5. Original and corrected net-proton multiplicity information entropy with error bars as a function of the collision energy in central Au+Au collisions with impact parameter b =3 fm based on the AMPT simulation (HNSM, HDBSM, HWFSM for AMPT-SM (solid symbols) and HNDEF, HDBDEF, HWFDEF for AMPT-DEF (open symbols)).
Taking AMPT-SM simulations as example, the original and corrected information entropy are explicitly discussed. The multiplicity information entropy of the original net-proton distributions was calculated, as shown in Fig. 5 with solid squares. The information entropy clearly increases with the collision energy. Because a larger bin number N of the net-proton distribution at a high energy can lead to a high information entropy, the higher information entropy of the high energy cannot directly reflect that the fluctuation amplitude of this distribution is smaller. The DB method was thus used to correct the multiplicity information entropy. To facilitate DB, N = 61 was selected as the standard bin number. The numbers of bins of net-proton distributions were then redistributed to N = 61 at different collision energies, and the redistributed multiplicity distributions are shown in Fig. 3 with solid circles. After DB, the information entropy was calculated, as shown in Fig. 5 with solid circles. The range of the net-proton information entropy  was changed from 3.42 to 3.52, with an increase of no more than 2.8%. This indicates that the fluctuations in the net-proton multiplicity with different energies are essentially the same. There may be no critical fluctuation phenomenon in Au+Au collisions simulated using the AMPT model, which is comparable to the AMPT model mechanism of not having a critical point set. More interestingly, the peak points of the information entropy in Fig. 5 correspond to the valley points of N in Fig. 4 at √sNN = 30, 50, 90, 110 GeV. The valley points of N may have been caused by the insufficient number of simulated events. This indicates that a small fluctuation in the information entropy may be optimized by increasing the number of simulated events. In the WF method, the standard bin number of the selected average distribution is S = 61 at √sNN = 4.7 GeV and . The corrected information entropy with bin number N can be expressed as
	 .	(3)
The results are shown in Fig. 5 with triangles. A similar trend in the information entropy was observed for the DB method. The peak points of the information entropy also correspond to the valley points of N in Fig. 4 at √sNN = 30, 50, 90 and 110 GeV. The HWFSM values are essentially the same for different collision energies, indicating that the system fluctuations at different collision energies are similar. This indicates that there may be no critical fluctuation phenomenon in the Au+Au collisions simulated using the AMPT model. The two methods have similar characteristics with regard to changing the information entropy, which validates the information entropy correction in terms of the bin number.
The information entropy of AMPT-DEF shown in FIG. 5 are very similar to results of AMPT-SM with same parameter sets, but slightly larger than that of AMPT-SM. The larger information entropy means that the net-proton distribution fluctuates weaker than that of AMPT-SM, because the effect of partonic phase in AMPT-SM may led higher fluctuations. The corrected information entropy may be an effective probe to explore the QCD phase transition.
Because more incoming nucleons stop and thus increase the net-baryon number at mid-rapidity [1, 41, 42], the net-baryon density fluctuation at lower energies and more central collisions is reduced. The mid-rapidity netproton multiplicity information entropy was calculated for comparison. 100000 events were both generated for AMPT-SM and AMPT-DEF models for central Au+Au collisions at √sNN = 4.7, 6.4, 7.7, 8.8, 11.5, 20, 30, 40, 50, 60, 70, 80, 90, 100, 110, 140, 170, and 200 GeV, with the mid-rapidity of |y| < 0.5 at a collision parameter b = 3 fm. Figure 6 shows the original event-by-
 
FIG. 6. Net-proton simulated using the AMPT model (solid squares for AMPT-SM, open squares for AMPT-DEF) and corrected by the DB method (solid circles for AMPT-SM, open circles for AMPT-DEF) at different energies in central Au+Au collisions with impact parameter b =3 fm and midrapidity |y| < 0.5.
 
FIG. 7. Original and corrected net-proton multiplicity information entropies with error bars at different energies in central Au+Au collisions with impact parameter b = 3 fm and mid-rapidity   for AMPT-SM
(solid symbols) and HNDEF, HDBDEF, HWFDEF for AMPT-DEF (open symbols)).
event multiplicity distributions of the mid-rapidity net protons. The abscissa indicates the number of particles corresponding to i in Eq. (1), and the ordinate indicates the event probability of having i particles corresponding to pi in Eq. (1). Subsequently, the information entropy can be calculated using Eq. (1); the results are shown in Fig. 7 with squares. Because the information entropy increases as the fluctuation degree of pi decreases and is maximized when pi is average distributed, the information entropy at a possible critical fluctuation should be a valley value as a function of collision energies. However, the valley value of the information entropy in Fig. 7 cannot be considered as a critical fluctuation phenomenon, because the bin number of the pi distribution in Fig. 6 is different at different collision energies. In this case, the information entropy must be corrected.
 
FIG. 8. Number of bins N of the net-proton distribution as a function of the collision energy in central Au+Au collisions with impact parameter b = 3 fm and mid-rapidity |y| < 0.5 based on the AMPT simulation (solid circles for AMPT-SM and open circles for AMPT-DEF).
Figure 8 shows the bin number of the net-proton multiplicity at different collision energies in the central Au+Au collisions with |y| < 0.5. For AMPT-SM simulations, the original and corrected information entropy in midrapidity are discussed. The bin number N distribution first decreased and then increased. For comparison, the bin number of the net-proton distribution of the same collision energy √sNN = 4.7 GeV was chosen as a standard, which is N = 49. Subsequently, the bin numbers of the net-proton multiplicity distribution at mid-rapidity were all redistributed to N = 49 at different energies, and the new net-proton distributions are shown in Fig. 6 with solid circles. The corrected information entropy obtained using the DB method is presented in Fig. 7 with solid circles. The range of the corrected information entropy changes from 3.24 to 3.30, with an increase of no more than 2%. There may be no critical fluctuation phenomenon in the central Au+Au collisions at mid-rapidity simulated using the AMPT model.
The same interesting phenomenon occurred in that the peak points of the information entropy in Fig. 7 with solid circles correspond to the valley points of N in Fig. 6
(solid circles) at √sNN = 70, 100 GeV. Therefore, a slight fluctuation in the information entropy is caused by the fluctuation of the bin-number distribution. Adding the number of events to the AMPT simulation may improve this slight fluctuation in the information entropy.
Figure 7 also shows the WF method-corrected information entropy of the net-proton multiplicity at midrapidity with solid triangles. In this calculation, the standard bin number of the selected average distribution is S = 49 at √sNN = 4.7 GeV, and the corrected information entropy with bin number N at other collision energies can be expressed as
	 .	(4)
The information entropy is essentially the same for different collision energies, which is similar to the trend for the DB method. The results again indicate that there was no critical fluctuation in the AMPT simulations. The conclusion in AMPT-DEF is almost the same as that in AMPT-SM’s.
 
FIG. 9. Information entropy and kurtosis. (a) and (d) are the original and DB corrected information entropy of net-proton. (c) and (f) are the original and DB corrected kurtosis of netproton. (b), (d), (e) and (g) are the same with (a), (d), (c) and (f), respectively, but in the mid-rapidity (solid circles for AMPT-SM and open squares for AMPT-DEF).
Since high-order fluctuations [2] of conserved quantities are recognized as sensitive observables to probe the QCD phase transition, the DB corrected information entropy has been compared with high-order fluctuation, such as fourth-order cumulants (kurtosis). The detail of kurtosis can be found in Ref. [2], which is defined as
	 ,	(5)
where δM = M −⟨M⟩, M is the number of particles, and ⟨M⟩ is the average of particle numbers. In this letter, M is the number of net-protons in the central Au+Au collisions at different energies. Figure 9 shows the information entropy and kurtosis of net-protons with AMPT-SM and AMPT-DEF models.
From Fig. 9 (c) and (f), the results of kurtosis are almost the same before and after DB correction, but the information entropies reflect same fluctuation with kurtosis only after DB correction (see Fig. 9 (d) and (f)). This shows the importance of information entropy correction from another side, and the corrected information entropy can be used to describe the multiplicity fluctuations. From Fig. 9 (b), (d), (e) and (g), the results also reflect the necessity of information entropy correction when information entropy used for characterizing the fluctuations of net-proton distributions in the midrapidity of |y| < 0.5.
In this study, the net-proton multiplicity information entropy was calculated using the AMPT-SM and AMPTDEF models to generate central Au+Au collisions at √sNN = 4.7, 6.4, 7.7, 8.8, 11.5, 20, 30, 40, 50, 60, 70, 80, 90, 100, 110, 140, 170, and 200 GeV with the impact parameter b = 3 fm. The results indicated that both the DB and WF methods can reduce the influence of the bin number, which is important for judging the fluctuations of different multiplicity distributions using information-entropy values. In the same AMPT model, the fluctuations of the net-proton multiplicity were essentially the same at collision energies ranging from √sNN = 4.7 GeV to √sNN = 200 GeV. The slight float of the corrected information entropy was related to the corresponding number of bins in different net-proton multiplicity distributions. There was no critical fluctuation phenomenon in the central Au+Au collisions simulated using the AMPT model. Comparing to the AMPT-
DEF model, the slightly smaller information entropy in AMPT-SM indicates that the effect of partonic phase leads to a bigger fluctuation in HICs. The mid-rapidity net-proton multiplicity information entropy was also calculated with rapidity cutting |y| < 0.5. The results indicated that the DB and WF methods have similar characteristics in changing the information entropy in terms of the bin number. The corrected information entropy of the net-proton multiplicity changed by no more than 2% as the energy increased from 4.7 to 200 GeV. This was another point of no critical fluctuation in the Au+Au collision simulations using the AMPT model. The use of the DB and WF methods can significantly reduce the influence of the bin number on the information entropy in different distributions. The corrected information entropy can be used to judge the fluctuations of different distributions with different numbers of bins. This is also indirectly proven from the comparison with kurtosis. Additionally, the corrected information entropy can be used to reflect the multiplicity fluctuation in HICs and is useful for investigating the critical fluctuation phenomenon. The results of this study indicate that there may be no critical fluctuation in the energy scan of central Au+Au collisions in the AMPT simulation. This is comparable to the case of the AMPT model, which does not have.
In summary, from the AMPT-SM and AMPT-DEF simulations, net-proton information entropy can be used to describe the multiplicity fluctuations in HICs. This is one of the probes used to investigate the critical fluctuation phenomenon, which is important for the CEP. Therefore, it is important to study information entropy and apply it rationally to HICs. The number of bins and fluctuation of the multiplicity distribution are two important factors affecting the information-entropy value in mathematical terms. Different distributions with different bin numbers cannot be directly described by the information entropy to indicate the degree of confusion. Two methods, i.e., DB and WF, can be used to reduce the influence of the bin numbers of different distributions. The comparison between information entropy and kurtosis also reflects the necessity to correct the information entropy in physical analysis. In the future, the corrected information entropy of particle multiplicity distributions can be employed as a probe for HICs with energy scans by using experimental data or large-scale simulations to investigate the critical fluctuation phenomenon. This would be advantageous for simple exploration of the critical point.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This work was supported in part by the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant Nos. 12105079, 12105080, and 11975091, the Program for Innovative Research Team (in Science and Technology) in University of Henan Province (Grant No. 21IRTSTHN011), China.
 
[1]	A. Bzdak et al. Phys. Rept. 853, 1 (2020).
[2]	X. Luo et al. Nucl. Sci. Tech. 28, 112 (2017).
[3]	M. Asakawa et al. Phys. Rev. Lett. 85, 2072 (2000).
[4]	T. Andrews. Proc. R. Soc. Lond. 18, 42 (1869).
[5]	M. Asakawa et al. Phys. Rev. Lett. 101, 122302 (2008).
[6]	K. J. Sun et al. Phys. Lett. B 774, 103 (2017).
[7]	K. J. Sun et al. Phys. Lett. B 781, 499 (2018).
[8]	N. Yu et al. Chin. Phys. C 44, 014002 (2020). [9] J. Xu et al. Phys. Rev. C 94, 024901 (2016).
[10]	J. Xu. J. Phys. Conf. Ser. 736, 012002 (2016).
[11]	K. J. Sun et al. Phys. Lett. B 816, 136258 (2021).
[12]	K. J. Sun et al. Phys. Rev. D 103, 014006 (2021). [13] Y. G. Ma. Phys. Rev. Lett. 83, 3617 (1999).
[14] G. L. Ma et al. Chin. Phys. Lett. 20, 1013 (2003). [15] C. E. Shannon. Bell Syst. Tech. J. 27, 379 (1948).
[16] C. W. Ma et al. Prog. Part. Nucl. Phys. 99, 120 (2018). [17] Y. Wang et al. Brit. J. Radiol. 89, 1062, 20140636 (2016).
[18]	F. Jin et al. Int. J. Radiat. Oncol. 96, 481 (2016).
[19]	M. Tang et al. Entropy 16, 4583 (2014).
[20]	C. R. de Sá et al. Inform. sciences 329, 921 (2016).
[21]	Z. Li et al. Appl. Soft. Comput. 26, 299 (2015). [22] C. W. Ma et al. Nucl. Sci. Tech. 33, 6 (2022). [23] Z. Cao et al. Phys. Rev. D 53, 6608 (1996).
[24]	C. W. Ma et al. Phys. Lett. B 742, 19 (2015).
[25]	C. W. Ma et al. J. Phys. G 43, 045102 (2016).
[26]	H. L. Wei et al. Nucl. Sci. Tech. 33, 111 (2022). [27] A. Alves et al. Braz. J. Phys. 47, 426 (2017).
[28]	R. Casadio et al. Phys. Lett. B 763, 434 (2016).
[29]	M. Gleiser et al. Phys. Lett. B 747, 125 (2015).
[30]	R. A. C. Correa et al. Phys. Lett. B 737, 388 (2014).
[31]	F. Li et al. Eur. Phys. J. A 56, 167 (2020).
[32]	Z. W. Lin et al. Phys. Rev. C 72, 064901 (2005). [33] Z. W. Lin et al. Nucl. Sci. Tech. 32, 113 (2021).
[34]	Z. W. Lin et al. Phys. Rev. C 64, 011902 (2001).
[35]	Z. W. Lin et al. Phys. Rev. C 65, 034904 (2002).
[36]	B. Zhang et al. Phys. Rev. C 65, 054909 (2002).
[37]	S. Pal et al. Nucl. Phys. A 707, 525 (2002).
[38]	Z. W. Lin et al. J. Phys. G 30, S263 (2004).
[39]	S. Guiasu et al. Math. Intell. 7, 42 (1985).
[40]	P. D. Brouwer. The Big R Book, chapter 19, 343–361.
John Wiley and Sons, Ltd (2020).
[41]	A. Andronic. Int. J. Mod. Phys. A 29, 1430047 (2014). [42] C. Shen et al. Phys. Rev. C 97, 024907 (2018).
Probing the QCD Critical Point with Higher
Moments of Net-proton Multiplicity Distributions
Xiaofeng Luo for the STAR Collaboration
Department of Modern Physics, University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei 230026, China
Nuclear Science Division, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA
E-mail: xfluo@lbl.gov
Abstract. Higher moments of event-by-event net-proton multiplicity distributions are applied to search for the QCD critical point in the heavy ion collisions. It has been demonstrated that higher moments as well as moment products are sensitive to the correlation length and directly connected to the thermodynamic susceptibilities computed in the Lattice QCD and Hadron Resonance Gas (HRG) model. In this paper, we will present measurements for kurtosis (κ), skewness (S) and variance (σ2) of net-proton multiplicity distributions at the mid-rapidity
(200|y| <GeV, Cu+Cu collisions at0.5) and 0.4 < pT < 0.8√GeVsNN/c=22.4, 62.4for Au+Au collisions atand 200 GeV, d+Au collisions at =19.6, 39, 62.4, 130  and
GeV and p+p collisions at  =62.4 and 200 GeV. The moment products κσ2 and Sσ of netproton distributions, which are related to volume independent baryon number susceptibility ratio, are compared to the Lattice QCD and HRG model calculations. The κσ2 and Sσ of net-proton distributions are consistent with Lattice QCD and HRG model calculations at high energy, which support the thermalization of the colliding system. Deviations of κσ2 and Sσ for the Au+Au collisions at low energies from HRG model calculations are also observed.
1.	Introduction
One of the main goals of heavy ion collision is to explore the phase structure of hot, dense nuclear matter [1]. Finite temperature Lattice QCD calculations demonstrate that with vanishing baryon chemical potential (µB = 0), the phase transition from the hadronic phase to the Quark Gluon Plasma (QGP) phase is a smooth crossover [2]. The corresponding transition temperature is about 170−190 MeV [3, 4]. At large µB region, the phase transition between hadronic phase and QGP phase is of first order [5] and with a second order end point at the boundary towards the crossover region, which is so called QCD Critical Point (CP) [6]. Although many efforts have been made by theorist and experimentalist to search for the CP, its location or even the existence is still not confirmed yet [7]. The first principle Lattice QCD calculation at finite µB are difficult due to the fermion sign problem. Several techniques, such as Re-weighting, Image baryon chemical potential and Taylor expansion [8] etc., have been developed to overcome those problems and make the Lattice QCD calculable at finite µB region. However, large uncertainties are still there.
Experimentally, heavy ion collision provides us a good opportunity to search for the CP. To access the QCD phase diagram, we can tune the chemical freeze out temperature (T) and baryon chemical potential (µB) by varying the colliding energy. As the characteristic signatures of the CP in a static and infinite medium is the divergence of the correlation length (ξ) and increase of non-Gaussian fluctuations. Thus, non-monotonic signals of CP are expected to be observed if the evolution trajectory ( T,µB ) in the QCD phase diagram of the system pass nearby the critical region and the signals are not washed out by the expansion of the colliding system.
Due to the finite size effect, rapid expansion and critical slowing down etc., the typical correlation length (ξ) developed in the heavy ion collision near the QCD critical point is a small value about 2 − 3 fm [9]. Recently, model calculations reveal that higher moments of conserved quantities distributions are proportional to the higher power of the correlation length [10, 11], such as fourth order cumulant < (δN)4 > −3 < (δN)2 >2∼ ξ7 , where δN = N − M, N is the particle multiplicity in one event and M is the averaged particle multiplicity of the event sample. On the other hand, the higher moments as well as moment products of conserved quantities distributions are also directly connected to the corresponding susceptibilities in Lattice QCD [12, 13] and HRG model [14] calculations, for e.g. the third order susceptibility of baryon number (χ(3)B ) is related to the third cumulant (< (δNB)3 >) of baryon number distributions as χ(3)B = < (δNB)3 >/V T3; V,T are volume and temperature of system respectively. It has been found that the volume independence baryon number susceptibility ratio can be directly connected to the moment products of baryon number distributions as κσ2 = χ(4)B /χ(2)B and
Sσ = χ(3)B /χ(2)B , which allows us to compare the theoretical calculations with experimental measurements. Theoretical calculations also demonstrate that the experimental measurable net-proton number (proton minus anti-proton number) event-by-event fluctuations can reflect the baryon number and charge fluctuations [15]. Thus, higher moments of the net-proton multiplicity distributions are applied to search for the QCD critical point in the heavy ion collisions [16, 17, 18]. When approaching the QCD critical point, the moment products κσ2 and Sσ will show large deviation from its Poisson statistical value. The skewness is expected to change its sign when system evolution trajectory in the phase diagram cross phase boundary [19].
In year 2010, RHIC Bean Energy Scan (BES) program [20] was carried out to map the first order QCD phase boundary and search for the QCD critical point by tuning the colliding energy from 39 GeV down to 7.7 GeV with the corresponding µB coverage about 100−410 MeV. With the large uniform acceptance and good capability of particle identification STAR detector, it provides us very good opportunities to find the QCD critical point with sensitive observable, if the existence of QCD critical point is true.
2.	Experimental Method
The data presented in the paper are obtained using the Solenoidal Tracker at RHIC (STAR). Those are Au+Au collisions at  =19.6 (year 2001), 39, 62.4 (year 2004), 130 and 200 GeV (year 2004), Cu+Cu collisions at  =22.4, 62.4, 200 GeV, d+Au at  
(year 2003) and p+p collisions at  =62.4 (year 2006), 200 GeV (year 2009). The main subsystem used in this analysis is a large, uniform acceptance cylindrical Time Projection Chamber (TPC) covering a pseudo-rapidity range of |η| < 1 and 2π azimuthal coverage. As a primary tracking device, it can measure the trajectories and momenta of particles with transverse momenta above 0.15 GeV/c. To ensure the purity and similar efficiency, the protons and antiprotons are identified with the ionization energy loss (dE/dx) measured by TPC of STAR detector within 0.4 < pT < 0.8 GeV/c and mid-rapidity (|y| < 0.5). Several track quality cuts are also used to select the tracks with good quality in each event. We require the distance of closest approach (dca) to the primary vertex of proton (antiproton) track less than 1 cm to suppress the contamination from secondary protons (antiproton). To study the centrality dependence of higher moments, centralities are determined by the uncorrected charged particle multiplicities (dNch/dη) within pseudo-rapidity |η| < 0.5 measured by TPC. By comparing measured dNch/dη with the Monto Carlo Glauber model results, we can obtain the average number of participant Npart, impact parameter b and number of binary nucleon-nucleon collisions Nbin for each centrality class.
3.	Analysis Method
In this section, we will introduce you how to perform the higher moments analysis with experimental data. First, we will show you the definition of the cumulants and various moments used in our analysis, such as standard deviation (σ), skewness (S) and kurtosis (κ). Then, we will discuss about the Centrality Bin Width Effect (CBWE).
3.1.	Moments and Cumulants of Event-by-Event Fluctuations
In statistics, probability distribution functions can be characterized by the various moments, such as mean (M), variance (σ2), skewness (S) and kurtosis (κ). Before introducing the above moments used in our analysis, we would like to define cumulants, which are alternative methods to the moments of a distribution. The cumulants determine the moments in the sense that any two probability distributions whose cumulants are identical will have identical moments as well.
Experimentally, we measure net-proton number event-by-event wise, Np−p¯ = Np −Np¯, which is proton number minus antiproton number, in the mid-rapidity (|y| < 0.5) and within the transverse momentum 0.4 < pT < 0.8 GeV/c. In the following, we use N to represent the net-proton number Np−p¯ in one event. The average value over whole event ensemble is denoted by < N >, where the single angle brackets are used to indicate ensemble average of an eventby-event distributions.
The deviation of N from its mean value are defined by
	δN = N− < N > .	(1)
Then, we can define the various order cumulants of event-by-event distributions as:
	C1,N =< N >,C2,N =< (δN)2 >,C3,N =< (δN)3 >,C4,N =< (δN)4 > −3 < (δN)2 >2 .	(2)
An important property of the cumulants is their additivity for independent variables. If X and Y are two independent random variables, then we have Ci,X+Y = Ci,X + Ci,Y for ith order cumulant. This property will be used in our study.
Once we have the definition of cumulants, various moments can be denoted as:
	 	(3)
And also, the moments product κσ2 and Sσ can be expressed in term of cumulant ratio.
	 .	(4)
With above definition of various moments, we can calculate various moments and moment products with the measured event-by-event net-proton fluctuations for each centrality.
3.2.	Centrality Bin Width Effect (CBWE) Correction
The centralities in this analysis are determined by the uncorrected charged particle multiplicity (Nch) measured at middle pseudo-rapidity (|η| < 0.5) by the TPC of the STAR detector. Before calculating various moments of net-proton distributions for one centrality, such as 0−5%, 5−10% , we should consider the so called Centrality Bin Width Effect (CBWE) arising from the impact parameter fluctuations due to the finite centrality bin width. This effect must be corrected, as it may cause different centrality dependence. To formulate and demonstrate the centrality bin width effect, we write the event-by-event net-proton distributions in one centrality:
	P(N) = Xωif(i)(N),(Xωi = 1),	(5)
	i	i
where the ωi and f(i)(N) are the weighted and net-proton distributions for ith impact parameter in one centrality, respectively. From eqs. (2)-(5) and (11), we can calculate the various order cumulants for the distribution P(N) as below:
C1,N	=	XωiC1i,N = Xωi < N >i
i	i			(6)
C2,N	=	 			(7)
C3,N	=	 			(8)
C4,N	=	 			
	+	 	,1,Ci	)	
			1,N	2,N	1,N	1,N	2,N	
	−	 ,	(9)
where the Ck,Ni (k = 1,2,3,4) are the kth order cumulant for net-proton distribution f(i)(N); the  4) are kth order cutmulant for random variable X = Cm,Ni under the discrete probability distribution Prob(X)=ωi; the 
(X = Ck,Ni , k = 1,2,3,4) are the first order joint cumulant for random variable X,Y under the discrete probability distribution Prob(X,Y )=ωi. We find that the higher order cumulants Ck,N (k = 1,2,3,4) can be expressed by the addition of two parts, one is the weighted average of the same order cumulant of each sub-distribution f(i)(N), and the other part is the cumulant of lower order cumulant under the discrete weighted distributions, which stems from the fluctuation of impact parameters within the centrality and results in the CBWE.
Experimentally, the smallest centrality bin is determined by a single uncorrected reference multiplicity value measured by TPC. Generally, we usually report our results for a wider centrality bin, such as 0−5%,5−10%,...etc., to supress the statistical fluctuations. To eliminate the centrality bin width effect, we calculate the various moment for each single Nch within one wider centrality bin and weighted averaged by the number of events in each Nch.
	,	(10)
(11)
(12)
where the nr is the number of events in rth refmult and the corresponding weight ωr = nr/Pnr.
r
4.	Results
In this section, we will present beam energy and system size dependence for the various moments (M,σ,S,κ) as well as moment products (κσ2,Sσ) of net-proton distributions for Au+Au collisions at  = 19.6, 39, 62.4, 130, 200 GeV, Cu+Cu collisions at  = 22.4, 62.4, 200 GeV, d+Au collisions at  = 200 GeV and p+p collisions at 
First, we will show the typical event-by-event net-proton multiplicity distributions from different colliding systems. Then we studied the centrality as well as energy dependence of various moments and moment products. The systematic errors are estimated by varying the following requirements for p(¯p) tracks: DCA, track quality reflected by the number of ot points used in track reconstruction and the dE/dx selection criteria for p(¯p) identification. The statistical and systematic error are shown separately by lines and brackets, respectively.
4.1.	Event-by-Event Net-proton Multiplicity Distributions
Event-by-event net-proton multiplicity distributions for Au+Au collisions at  = 39 GeV measured within 0.4 < pT < 0.8 GeV/c and |y| < 0.5 are shown in Fig. 1. Going from peripheral to central collisions, it is found that the distributions become wider and more symmetric for central collisions.
 
Figure 1. Typical event-by-event net-proton multiplicity distributions for Au+Au collisions at
 = 39 GeV.
4.2.	Centrality Dependence of Moments and Moment Products of Net-proton Distributions
The centrality (Npart) dependence for various moments (M,σ,S,κ) of net-proton multiplicity distributions from Au+Au collisions at  =39, 62.4 and 200 GeV, Cu+Cu collisions at  =22.4, 62.4 and 200 GeV, d+Au collisions at  =200 GeV and p+p collisions at
 =62.4 and 200 GeV are shown in Fig. 2 and Fig. 3. We find that M and σ increase with Npart monotonically, while S and κ decrease with Npart. The centrality and energy dependence of S and κ indicate that the net-proton distributions become more symmetric for more central collision and higher energies.
The dashed lines in the Fig. 2 and Fig. 3 represent the expectations from Central Limit Theorem (CLT) when assuming the superposition of many identical and independent particle emission sources in the system [17, 18]. In Fig. 2 and 3, the centrality dependence of various moments can be well described by the dashed lines expected from CLT. Especially in Fig. 3, the various moments of p+p and d+Au collisions follow the CLT lines of Cu+Cu collision at the
 
	Npart	Npart
Figure 2. Centrality dependence of various moments of Figure 3. Centrality dependence of various moments of net-proton multiplicity distributions for Au+Au collisions net-proton multiplicity distributions for Cu+Cu collisions at  =39, 62.4, 200 GeV. The dashed lines shown  = 22.4, 62.4 and 200 GeV, d+Au collisions at in the figure are expectation lines from Central Limit  = 200 GeV and p+p collisions at  
Theorem (CLT).	and 200 GeV. The dashed lines shown in the figure are
expectation lines from Central Limit Theorem (CLT).
corresponding energy very well. This also supports the identical independent emission sources assumption. Fig. 4 shows the centrality dependence of moment products Sσ and κσ2 of net-
 
Figure 4. Moment products (κσ2 and Sσ) of net-proton distributions for Au+Au, Cu+Cu, d+Au and p+p collisions.
proton distributions, which are directly related to the baryon number susceptibility ratio in Lattice QCD and HRG models as κσ2 = χ(4)B /χ(2)B and Sσ = χ(3)B /χ(2)B , for p+p, Cu+Cu and Au+Au collisions at various colliding energies. Sσ shows a weak increase with centrality, while the κσ2 shows no centrality dependence.
4.3.	Energy Dependence of the Moment Products (Sσ and κσ2)
 
Figure 5. Energy dependence of moment products (κσ2 and Sσ) of net-proton distributions for central Au+Au collisions (0−5%, 19.6 GeV: 0−10%, 130 GeV: 0−6%). The red dashed lines denote the HRG model calculations, in which the Sσ = tanh(µB/T) and κσ2=1. The empty markers denote the results calculated from Lattice QCD [4].	Figure 6. Energy dependence of moment products (κσ2 and Sσ) of net-proton distributions for Cu+Cu central collisions (0 − 10%, 22.4 GeV: 0 − 5%). The dashed lines shown in the figures are from HRG model calculations, in which Sσ = tanh(µB/T) and κσ2=1. The µB and T values are taken from [21].
In Fig. 5, we show the energy dependence of the Sσ and κσ2 of net-proton distributions for most central Au+Au collisions (0 − 5%, 19.6 GeV: 0 − 10%, 130 GeV: 0 − 6%). Lattice QCD [4] and HRG model [14] calculations are also shown for comparison. Lattice QCD results are obtained with time extent Nτ = 6 and phase transition temperature at µB=0, Tc = 175 MeV. The red dashed lines of the HRG model in the upper panel and lower panels are evaluated by Sσ = tanh(µB/T) and κσ2 = 1, respectively, where the µB/T ratio at chemical freeze-out is parameterized as a function of colliding energy based on reference [22]. The corresponding baryon chemical potential (µB) at chemical freeze-out for each energy is shown in the upper band of the Fig. 5. We find that the moment products (κσ2 and Sσ) of Au+Au collisions at
 =200, 130, 62.4 GeV are consistent with Lattice QCD and HRG model calculations. The Sσ and κσ2 for Au+Au collisions at  = 39 GeV deviates from HRG model calculations.
Surprisingly, κσ2 from Lattice QCD calculations at  = 19.6 GeV show a negative value [4]. However, due to the limited statistics, the statistical errors of experimental data are large at 19.6 GeV. The STAR is running to take more data at 19.6 GeV in year 2011. Those deviations could be linked to the chiral phase transition [23] and presence of QCD critical point [24]. Recent linear σ model calculations demonstrate that the forth order cumulant of the fluctuations for σ field will be universally negative, when the QCD critical point is approached from cross-over side [24]. It will cause the measured κσ2 as well as kurtosis (κ) of net-proton distributions to be smaller than their Poisson expectation values.
Fig. 6 shows the energy dependence of κσ2 and Sσ for Cu+Cu central collisions. The red dashed lines in the figure are obtained from the HRG model by using the formula Sσ = tanh(µB/T), where the µB and T are from thermal model fits of the particle ratios. We find that our experimental data is consistent with HRG model expectations for Sσ of netproton distributions. While the κσ2 deviates from HRG model calculations and monotonically decrease as the collision energy decreases.
4.4.	Charged Particle Density (dNch/dη) Scaling of Sσ and Evidence of Thermalization in Heavy Ion Collisions
 
Figure 7. Sσ of net-proton distributions as a function of charged particle density at mid-rapidity (dNch/dη) for various colliding systems. The dashed lines in the figures is the fitting lines.	Figure 8. Sσ of net-proton distributions as a function of baryon chemical potential over temperature ratio (µB/T) for most central collisions (0−5%, 130 GeV: 0−6%, d+Au : 0−20%). The red dashed line in the figures is the result of the HRG model. Lattice QCD results with Nτ = 6 and Tc = 175 MeV are also shown in the figure.
The Sσ of net-proton distributions for various colliding systems including Au+Au collisions at  = 62.4 and 200 GeV, Cu+Cu collisions at  = 22.4, 62.4 and 200 GeV, d+Au and p+p collisions at  = 200 GeV, as a function of dNch/dη are shown in the Fig. 7 with double logarithm axis. It is obvious that for a fixed colliding energy, such as  
GeV, the moment products of Sσ of net-proton distributions for different system size the p+p, d+Au, Cu+Cu and Au+Au collisions have power law dependence on the charged particle density (dNch/dη). Thus, we fit the Sσ of net-proton distributions for various colliding systems with double power law formula:
	 	(13)
The fitting results are shown in the Table. 1. The Sσ can be well described by the power law
Table 1. Fitting parameters for Sσ as a function of dNch/dη
Parameters	Value	Approx.
χ2/ndf	34.08/37	0.92
α	3.669±0.1358	11 3
β	0.0853±0.003927	1
12
γ	-0.6796 0.00693	2
	±	−3
formula , where the s is the square of the center of mass energy. For high energy heavy ion collisions the temperature is approximately constant and the ratio µB/T << 1, thus we have the approximation . This denotes the relation between µB/T and the charged particle density and colliding energy for high energy nuclear collisions.
Multiplicity fluctuations and inclusive yields are two basic properties in high energy heavy ion collisions. For a thermal system, both the fluctuations and yields should be described by the thermodynamic parameters (µB and T), which completely determine the properties of the thermal system. The fluctuation observable Sσ of most central net-proton distributions versus thermodynamic parameter µB/T ratios, which are extracted from the thermal model fit of the particle ratio, is shown in the Fig. 8 for various colliding systems. Lattice QCD calculations with Nτ = 6 and Tc = 175 MeV and the HRG model relation Sσ = tanh(µB/T) are also plotted in Fig. 8 for comparison. We find that high energy heavy ion collisions, such as Au+Au and Cu+Cu collisions, are consistent with Lattice QCD and HRG model calculations, while the elementary p+p collision deviate from the HRG model calculations. In addition to the perfect description of the particle yields by the thermal model, the agreement of higher order fluctuations with thermal model predications provide further evidence that the colliding system has achieved thermalization in most central high energy heavy ion collision.
5.	Summary
The higher moments of net-proton multiplicity distributions measured in heavy ion collision experiment have been applied to search for the QCD critical point, due to the high sensitivity to the correlation length (ξ). The beam energy and system size dependence for higher moments (M,σ,S,κ) as well as moment products (κσ2, Sσ) of net-proton multiplicity distributions have been presented with a broad energy range and different system sizes, which include Au+Au collisions at  = 200, 130, 62.4, 39 and 19.6 GeV, Cu+Cu collisions at  = 200, 62.4 and  = 200 GeV, p+p collisions at 
The moment product κσ2 shows no centrality dependence while Sσ shows a weak centrality dependence. The energy dependence is studied by comparing the results from the Au+Au 200 GeV to those from the BES energies. The moment products κσ2 and Sσ of net-proton distributions from most central Au+Au collisions are consistent with Lattice QCD and HRG model calculations at high energy (200, 130, 62.4 GeV) while deviating from (smaller than)
	HRG model calculations at	 = 39 GeV. Lattice QCD calculations show negative value for
 = 19.6 GeV. The deviations could potentially be linked to chiral phase transitions
and QCD critical point. But the experimental data is with large error bar due to the limited statistics. Fortunately, this ambiguity can be clarified soon by 19.6 GeV data taken in year 2011 with higher statistics. Recent model calculations show that the κσ2 value will always be smaller than its Poisson statistical value 1, when QCD critical point is approached from the high energy cross-over side.
On the other hand, the mutual agreements between the µB/T extracted from thermal model fits of particle ratio and from the event-by-event fluctuations observable Sσ of net-proton distributions provides further evidence of thermalization of the hot dense matter created in the heavy ion collisions. Further, the κσ2 and Sσ of net-proton distributions are consistent with Lattice QCD and HRG model calculations at high energy, which support the thermalization of the colliding system. The deviations of the κσ2 and Sσ of net-proton distributions for Au+Au central collisions from HRG model predications at low energies are not well understood. This may result from the non-applicability of grand canonical ensemble or the appearance of QCD critical point and chiral phase transitions at low energies. However, it should be further investigated.
Acknowledgement
We thank S. Gupta, F. Karsch, K. Rajagopal, K. Redlich, M. Stephanov for enlightening discussions. We thank the RHIC Operations Group and RCF at BNL, the NERSC Center at LBNL and the Open Science Grid consortium for providing resources and support. This work was supported in part by the Offices of NP and HEP within the U.S. DOE Office of Science, the U.S. NSF, the Sloan Foundation, the DFG cluster of excellence ‘Origin and Structure of the Universe’ of Germany, CNRS/IN2P3, FAPESP CNPq of Brazil, Ministry of Ed. and Sci. of the Russian Federation, NNSFC, CAS, MoST, and MoE of China, GA and MSMT of the Czech Republic, FOM and NWO of the Netherlands, DAE, DST, and CSIR of India, Polish Ministry of Sci. and Higher Ed., Korea Research Foundation, Ministry of Sci., Ed. and Sports of the Rep. Of Croatia, and RosAtom of Russia.
References
[1]	J. Adams et al. (STAR Collaboration), Nucl. Phys. A 757 (2005) 102.
[2]	Y. Aoki et al., Nature 443 675 (2006).
[3]	Y. Aoki et al., Phys. Lett. B 643 (2006) 46; M. Cheng et al., Phys. Rev. D 74 (2006) 054507.
[4]	S. Gupta, X. Luo, B. Mohanty, H. G. Ritter, N. Xu, arXiv: 1105.3934.
[5]	S. Ejiri, Phys. Rev. D 78 (2008) 074507 ; E. S. Bowman, J. I. Kapusta, Phys. Rev. C 79 (2009) 015202.
[6]	M. A. Stephanov, Prog. Theor. Phys. Suppl. 153 (2004) 139; Z. Fodor and S. D. Katz, Journal of High Energy Physics 0404 (2004) 50; R. V. Gavai, S. Gupta, Phys. Rev. D 78 (2008) 114503.
[7]	M. A. Stephanov, Int. J. Mod. Phys. A 20 (2005) 4387; B. Mohanty, Nucl. Phys. A 830 (2009) 899c.
[8]	Z. Fodor, S. D. Katz, Phys. Lett. B 534 (2002) 87; Philippe de Forcrand and O. Philipsen, Nucl. Phys. B 642 (2002) 290; R. V. Gavai, S. Gupta, Phys. Rev. D 68 (2003) 034506.
[9]	M. A. Stephanov et al., Phys. Rev. D 60 (1999) 114028; B. Berdnikov and K. Rajagopal, Phys. Rev. D 65 (2000) 105017.
[10]	M. A. Stephanov, Phys. Rev. Lett. 102 (2009) 032301.
[11]	C. Athanasiou et al., Phys. Rev. D 82 (2010) 074008.
[12]	R. V. Gavai and S. Gupta, Phys. Lett. B 696 (2011) 459.
[13]	M. Cheng, et al., Phys. Rev. D 79 (2009) 074505.
[14]	F. Karsch and K. Redlich, Phys. Lett. B 695 (2011) 136.
[15]	Y. Hatta and M. A. Stephanov, Phys. Rev. Lett. 91 (2003) 102003.
[16]	X. Luo et al., arXiv:1105.5049.
[17]	M. M. Aggarwal et al. (STAR Collaboration), Phys. Rev. Lett. 105 (2010) 022302.
[18]	X. Luo et al., J. Phys. G: Nucl. Phys. 37 (2010) 094061.
[19]	M. Asakawa et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 103 (2009) 262301.
[20]	B. I. Abelev et al. (STAR Collaboration), Phys. Rev. C 81 (2010) 024911; STAR Internal Note - SN0493, 2009.
[21]	M. M. Aggarwal et al., Phys. Rev. C 83 (2010) 34910.
[22]	J. Cleymans et al., Phys. Rev. C 73 (2006) 034905.
[23]	B. Friman, arXiv:1103.3511.
[24]	M. A. Stephanov, arXiv:1104.1627.
Volume Fluctuation and Autocorrelation Effects in the Moment Analysis of Net-proton Multiplicity Distributions in Heavy-Ion Collisions
Xiaofeng Luo
Key Laboratory of Quark and Lepton Physics (MOE) and Institute of Particle Physics, Central China Normal University, Wuhan 430079, China
Ji Xu
Key Laboratory of Quark and Lepton Physics (MOE) and Institute of Particle Physics,
Central China Normal University, Wuhan 430079, China
Bedangadas Mohanty
National Institute of Science Education and Research, Bhubaneswar 751005, India
Nu Xu
Key Laboratory of Quark and Lepton Physics (MOE) and Institute of Particle Physics,
Central China Normal University, Wuhan 430079, China
Nuclear Science Division, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA.
E-mail: xfluo@iopp.ccnu.edu.cn
Abstract. Moments (Variance (σ2), Skewness(S), Kurtosis(κ)) of multiplicity distributions of conserved quantities, such as net-baryon,net-charge and net-strangeness, are predicted to be sensitive to the correlation length of the system and connected to the thermodynamic susceptibilities computed in Lattice QCD and Hadron Resonance Gas (HRG) model. In this paper, we present several measurement artifacts that could lead to volume fluctuation and autocorrelation effects in the moment analysis of net-proton multiplicity distributions in heavy-ion collisions using the UrQMD model. We discuss methods to overcome these artifacts so that the extracted moments could be used to obtain physical conclusions. In addition we present methods to properly estimate the statistical errors in moment analysis.
1.	Introduction
One of the main goals of performing heavy-ion collision experiments is to explore the phase structure of the QCD matter [1]. The first principle Lattice QCD calculation shows that the transition from hadronic to partonic matter at zero µB is a smooth crossover [2], while at finite µB region there could be a first order phase transition [3]. The end point of the first order phase transition boundary is the so called QCD Critical Point (CP) [4]. It is well known that there are large uncertainties in the current Lattice QCD calculation for determining the first order phase boundary as well as the QCD critical point [5] in the QCD phase diagram. This is due to the sign problem at finite µB region [6].
In heavy-ion collision, the moments (Variance (σ2), Skewness(S), Kurtosis(κ)) of distributions of conserved quantities, such as net-baryon, net-charge and net-strangeness, are predicted to be sensitive to the correlation length of hot dense matter created in the collisions [7] and connected to the thermodynamic susceptibilities computed in Lattice QCD [4, 8, 9] and in the Hadron Resonance Gas (HRG) [10] model. For instance, the higher order cumulants of multiplicity (N) distributions are proportional to the high power of the correlation length (ξ) as third order cumulant C3 = Sσ3 =< (δN)3 >∼ ξ4.5 and fourth order cumulant
C4 = κσ4 =< (δN)4 > −3(δN)2 >∼ ξ7 [7], where theand < N > is the mean multiplicities. The moment products, κσ2 and , are also related to the ratios of various order susceptibilities, such as ratios of baryon number susceptibilities can be compared with the experimental data as κσ2 = χ(4)B /χ(2)B and Sσ = χ(3)B /χ(2)B [11]. Those susceptibility ratios cancel the volume effect to first order. Due to the sensitivity to the correlation length and the connection with the susceptibilities, we can use the higher moments of the conserved quantity distributions (within certain phase space) to search for the QCD critical point and map the first order phase boundary in the QCD phase diagram [12].
As the moment analysis of conserved quantities is a powerful observable to explore the QCD phase structure and study the phase transition properties of QCD matter, these have been widely studied experimentally and theoretically. To precisely extract physics message from experimental data, it is very important to address the background and artifact effects, such as volume fluctuation and auto-correlation effects, in the moment measurement. In this paper, we have developed several techniques to address those effects in the moment of net-proton multiplicity distributions, which will be demonstrated by using the events from a transport model. These techniques are not restricted to the net-proton analysis and can be also applied to the moments analysis of the net-charge and net-strangness, which are also being studied at RHIC. It will also provide a reference on how to perform model calculation for comparison with the experimental results.
The paper is organized as follows. In section II we briefly discuss the UrQMD model used for the analysis presented here. In section III we define the observables. In section IV, we present different methods of estimating the statistical errors for moment analysis. Sections V and VI discuss the measurement artifacts, centrality bin width effect (CBWE), centrality resolution effect (CRE) and Auto-correlations effect (ACE), respectively. Finally in section VII we present a summary of the work.
2.	UrQMD Model
The Ultra Relativistic Quantum Molecular Dynamics (UrQMD) is a microscopic many-body approach to study p + p, p + A, and A + A interactions at relativistic energies and is based on the covariant propagation of color strings, constituent quarks, and diquarks accompanied by mesonic and baryonic degrees of freedom. Furthermore it includes rescattering of particles, the excitation and fragmentation of color strings, and the formation and decay of hadronic resonances. UrQMD is a transport model for simulating heavy-ion collisions in the energy range from SIS to RHIC (even in LHC). It combines different reaction mechanism, and can provide theoretical simulated results of various experimental observables. The main parts of UrQMD model are: two body reaction cross section, two body potential and decay width. More details about the UrQMD model can be found in the reference [13].
We performed our calculations with UrQMD model for Au+Au collisions at  = 7.7, 11.5, 19.6, 27, 39, 62.4, 200 GeV and the corresponding event statistics are 107, 108, 50, 65, 93, 29 and 28 million, respectively. We measure event-by-event wise Np−p¯ at the mid-rapidity (|y| < 0.5) and within the transverse momentum 0.4 < pT < 0.8 GeV/c. This is same kinematic range used in moment analysis of net-proton distributions as in the STAR experiment [14, 12, 15, 16].
3.	Observables
In statistics, probability density distribution functions can be characterized by the various moments, such as mean (M), variance (σ2), skewness (S) and kurtosis (κ). Before introducing the above moments used in our analysis, we would like to define cumulants, which are alternative approach compared to moments to characterize a distribution. The cumulants determine the moments in the sense that any two probability distributions whose cumulants are identical will have identical moments as well, and similarly the moments can determine the cumulants.
In the following, we use N to represent the net-proton number Np−p¯ in one event. The average value over whole event ensemble is denoted by < N >, where the single angle brackets are used to indicate ensemble average of a event-by-event distribution. The deviation of N from its mean value is defined by
	δN = N− < N >	(1)
The various order cumulants of event-by-event distributions of a variable N are defined as:
C1,N	=	< N >	(2)
C2,N	=	< (δN)2 >	(3)
C3,N	=	< (δN)3 >	(4)
C4,N	=	< (δN)4 > −3 < (δN)2 >2	(5)
An important property of the cumulants is their additivity for independent variables. If X and Y are two independent random variables, then we have Ci,X+Y = Ci,X + Ci,Y for ith order cumulant.
Once we have the definition of cumulants, various moments can be obtained as:
	 	(6)
And also, the moments product κσ2 and Sσ can be expressed in terms of the ratio of cumulants like:
	 	(7)
With above definition, we can calculate various moments and moment products from the measured event-by-event net-proton distribution for each centrality.
4.	Statistical Error Estimation
As the moment analysis is a statistics hungry study, the error estimation is crucial to extract physics information from the limited experimental data. We will present several statistical methods (Delta theorem, Bootstrap [17], Sub-group) of error estimation in the moment analysis and compare them through a Monte Carlo simulation. For simplicity, we assume the particles are independently distributed as Poissonian distributions. Then, the difference of two independent Poisson distributions is distributed as ”Skellam” distribution. The skellam probability density distribution is
	 )	(8)
M = µ1 − µ2,σ = √µ1 + µ2
µ
S =	1 − µ2	,κ =	1
	(µ1 + µ2)2/3	µ1 + µ2	(9)
(10)
µ
	Sσ =	1 − µ2,κσ2 = 1
(11)
, where the µ1 and µ2 are the mean value of the Poisson distributions of particle type 1 and 2, respectively, the Ik(z) is the modified bessel function of the first kind. Then, we can calculate various moments (M,σ,S,κ) and moment products (κσ2,Sσ) products of the Skellam distribution. The relations are given below:
µ1 + µ2
To do the simulation, we set the two mean values of the Skellam distributions as µ1 = 4.11, µ2 = 2.99, which are similar with the mean proton and anti-proton numbers measured in central Au+Au collisions at  = 200 GeV by the STAR experiment [14]. Then, we generate random numbers as per the Skellam distribution. The details of Delta theorem error estimation method for moment analysis can be found in [18]. The bootstrap method [17] is based on the repeated sampling with the same statistics of the parent distribution and the statistical errors can be obtained as the root mean square of distribution of the observable from each sample. In the sub-group method, we randomly divide the whole sample into several sub-groups with same statistics and the errors are obtained as the root mean square of the distribution of the observable from each sub-group. In the simulation presented in the paper, we set 200 bootstrap times and 5 sub-groups.
Figure 1 shows the error estimation comparison between Delta theorem, Bootstrap and Subgroup methods for observable value (κσ2) of the Skellam distribution constructed in this study. For each method, fifty independent sets are sampled from the Skellam distribution with statistics 0.01 , 0.1 and 1 million, respectively. The probability for the observable value (κσ2) staying within ±1σ around expectation is about 68.3%. That would lead to error bars of about 33 out of 50 points should touch the expected value(dashed line at unity) in Fig. 1. We find that the results from the Delta theorem and Bootstrap method show similar error values and satisfies the above statistical criteria. It indicates that the Delta theorem and Bootstrap error estimation methods for the moment analysis are reasonable and can reflect the statistical properties of moments. while there are 49 out of 50 error bars touch the expected value in sub-group method, which means the sub-group method overestimates the statistical errors.
According to the error formula derived from delta theorem, for normal distributions, the errors for cumulants ratios are proportional to the standard deviation of the distribution as:
	 	(12)
	 	(13)
, where the n is the number of events.
5.	Volume Fluctuation Effect
In heavy-ion collisions, the collision centrality and/or initial collision geometry of two nuclei with finite volume is estimated by comparing the particle multiplicities with Glauber simulation [19]
 
FIG. 1. (Color online) κσ2 of 50 samples arranged by order, which are independently and randomly generated from Skellam distribution with different number of events (0.01, 0.1, 1 million). The dashed lines are expectations value 1.
and can not be measured directly. This drawback in general can cause two effects in the moment analysis of particle multiplicity distributions within finite centrality bin. One is the so called centrality bin width effect [15], which is caused by volume variation within a finite centrality bin size and the other one is centrality resolution effect, which is caused by the initial volume fluctuations [20]. In the following two sub-sections, we will discuss those two effects caused by volume fluctuation in detail with UrQMD model simulation and the corresponding methods to address those effects.
5.1.	Centrality Bin Width Effect (CBWE) and Correction
In heavy ion-collisions, the collision centrality can be explained as a percentage of the total cross-section, such as 0-5% (most central) and 30-40% (semi-peripheral), which indicates the fraction of a data sample relative to all possible collision geometries. It is usually determined by an observable like the charged particle multiplicity, in which the smallest centrality bin is a single multiplicity value. Generally, we report the results for a wider centrality bin, such as 0-5% and 5-10%, to have better statistical accuracy. But, before calculating various moments of particle number distributions for one wide centrality bin, such as 0-5%, 5-10%, we should consider the so called Centrality Bin Width Effect (CBWE) arising from the impact parameter (or volume) variations due to the finite centrality bin. This effect must be eliminated, as an artificial centrality dependence could be introduced due to finite centrality bin width. To demonstrate this effect, we define the centrality by the charged kaon and pion multiplicities within |η| < 2 in the UrQMD model calculations. This centrality definition is to avoid the auto-correlation and centrality resolution effects in the net-proton moment analysis, which will be discussed later. Before calculating various moments of particle number distributions for one wide centrality bin, such as 0-5%, 5-10%, we should consider the so called Centrality Bin Width Effect (CBWE) arising from the impact parameter (or volume) variations due to the finite centrality bin. This effect must be eliminated, as an artificial centrality dependence could be introduced due to finite centrality bin width.
To eliminate the centrality bin width effect, we have developed a technique called
Centrality Bin Width Correction (CBWC), to calculate the various moments of particle number
 
FIG. 2. (Color online) The centrality dependence of the moments products (Sσ) of net-proton multiplicity distributions for Au+Au collisions at  =7.7, 11.5, 19.6, 27, 39, 62.4, 200GeV in UrQMD model. The solid dots represent the results calculated from 32 centrality bins.
 
FIG. 3. (Color online) The centrality dependence of the moments products (κσ2) of net-proton multiplicity distributions for Au+Au collisions at  =7.7, 11.5, 19.6, 27, 39, 62.4, 200GeV in UrQMD model. The solid dots represent the results calculated from 32 centrality bins distributions in one wide centrality bin. Those formulas are:
(14)
(15)
(16)
, where the nr is the number of events in rth multiplicity for centrality determination, the σr, Sr and κr represent the standard deviation, skewness and kurtosis of particle number distributions at rth multiplicity. The corresponding weight for the rth multiplicity is ωr =
 .
Figure 2 and 3 show the centrality dependence of the moment products (Sσ,κσ2) of netproton multiplicity distributions for Au+Au collisions at  =7.7, 11.5, 19.6, 27, 39, 62.4 and 200 GeV obtained from the UrQMD model simulation. The open circle and open cross in Fig. 2 and 3 represent the results calculated with and without the technique of CBWC in the nine centralities (0-5%, 5-10%, 10-20%, 20-30%...70-80%), respectively. The solid circles show the result of centrality dependence of 32 bins in centrality (0-2.5%, 2.5-5%, 5-7.5%...77.5%-80%), in which the CBWC is not applied. For the case of nine centralities, we clearly observe that the results with CBWC are very different from those without CBWC. It means the CBWE do have a significant contribution to the value of the moment analysis and the CBWC will make the value of the moment products smaller by reducing the effect of variation of volume in one wide centrality bin. On the other hand, the results calculated from 32 centrality bins, for which the CBWE is small, are good agreement with the results from nine centralities with CBWC, which confirms the effectiveness of the proposed CBWC method. So, before we perform higher order moments calculation in one wide centrality in heavy-ion collisions, the CBWC should be applied to address the effect of variation of the volume within a wide centrality bin.
We also have tried to use the statistical errors as weight to perform the CBWC by replacing the weight factor nr in equ. (8)-(10) with 1/error2 for each single multiplicity bin. The statistical error is obtained by the Delta theorem method for moments of particle number distribution at each multiplicity bin. In Fig. 2 and 3 (open star), we find that the results with statistical error weighted CBWC are consistent with the results with events number weighted CBWC, but not for κσ2. It means the error weighted method can not be used for CBWC, which may be due to the statistical error is not only related to the number of events but also the moments itself.
5.2.	Centrality Resolution Effect (CRE)
The definition of the centralities for two colliding nuclei is not unique and can be defined through different quantities. A frequently used quantity is the so called impact parameter b, defined as the distance between the geometrical centers of the colliding nuclei in the plane transverse to their direction. Other variables, such as the number of participant nucleons, Npart and the number of binary collisions, Ncoll, can be also used. Unfortunately, those geometrical variables can’t be directly measured in the heavy-ion collision experiment and the collision centrality is determined from a comparison between experimental measures such as the particle multiplicity and Glauber
 
FIG. 4. (Color online) The centrality dependence of the σ2/M of Npart distributions for Au+Au collisions at  =7.7 GeV in UrQMD model with different centrality definition.
Monte-Carlo simulations [19]. Particle multiplicity, not only depends on the physics processes, but also reflects the initial geometry of the heavy-ion collision. This indicates that relation between measured particle multiplicity and impact parameter is not one-to-one correspond and there are fluctuations in the particle multiplicity even for a fixed impact parameter. Thus, it could have different initial collision geometry resolution (centrality resolution) for different centrality definitions with particle multiplicity. Fig. 4 shows the centrality dependence of σ2/M of number of participant nucleons (Npart) distributions for Au+Au collisions at  in UrQMD model. As the Npart can reflect the initial geometry (volume) of the colliding nuclei, the σ2/M of Npart distributions can be regarded as the centrality resolution for a certain centrality definition. It indicates that more particles are used in the centrality determination, the better centrality resolution and smaller fluctuation of the initial geometry (volume fluctuation) we get. This may affect moments of the event-by-event multiplicity distributions.
To verify CRE effect in the moment analysis, we use the charged kaon and pion multiplicity produced in the final state within |η| < 0.5,1,1.5 and 2 to define the centrality in the UrQMD calculations. Fig. 5 and 6 show the centrality dependence of the moment products (Sσ,κσ2) of net-proton multiplicity distributions with four different η ranges of charged kaon and pion used to determine the centrality. When we increase the η range (|η| < 1,1.5,2), the values of Sσ and κσ2 will decreases and show saturation around |η| < 2, which indicates the centrality resolution effect will enhance the moments values of net-proton multiplicity distributions. The significant difference for moment products (Sσ,κσ2) for the different η range of the centrality definition can be understood as the different contribution from volume fluctuations arising from different centrality definition.
Figure 7 shows the energy dependence of moment product (Sσ,κσ2) of net-proton multiplicity distributions for three different centralities (0-5%, 30-40%, 70-80%) with four different η ranges in Au+Au collisions. We can find that the κσ2 (fourth order fluctuation) is more sensitive to the centrality resolution effect than the Sσ (third order fluctuation), and it has larger effect in the peripheral collision as well as at low energies. Thus, we should use a lager η range in the centrality definition for the real experimental moment analysis.
 
FIG. 5. (Color online) The centrality dependence of the moments products Sσ of net-proton multiplicity distributions for Au+Au collisions at  =7.7, 11.5, 19.6, 27, 39, 62.4, 200 GeV in UrQMD model with different centrality definition.
 
FIG. 6. (Color online) The centrality dependence of the moments products κσ2 of net-proton multiplicity distributions for Au+Au collisions at  =7.7, 11.5, 19.6, 27, 39, 62.4, 200 GeV in UrQMD model with different centrality definition.
FIG. 7. (Color online) The energy dependence of the moments products (Sσ,κσ2) of net-proton multiplicity distributions for Au+Au collisions at  =7.7, 11.5, 19.6, 27, 39, 62.4, 200 GeV in UrQMD model with different centrality definition.
Figure 8 and 9 show the centrality dependence of moment products (Sσ,κσ2) of net-proton multiplicity distributions for Au+Au collisions with CBWC and without CBWC at different centrality resolution (|η| < 0.5,2). We can see that the CBWE and CRE have larger effect in the moment products at low energies than at high energies. The magnitude of CBWE in the moment products is comparable with the magnitude of CRE at low energies, while the CBWE has larger effects at higher energies.
Let’s summarize the CBWE and the CRE in the moment analysis in heavy-ion collisions. The CBWE stems from the variation of the volume when we perform the moment calculations within one wide centrality bin and the CRE is originated from the initial volume (geometry) fluctuations of the colliding nuclei. Both of those two effects are resulted from the volume fluctuation effects and it can be effectively addressed by using the CBWC and more particles (larger η coverage) in centrality definition, respectively.
6.	Auto-correlation Effect (ACE)
In the previous section, we use the multiplicity of charged kaon and pion to define the centrality in Au+Au collisions. The reason is to avoid the effect of auto-correlation between protons/antiprotons involved in our moments analysis and in the centrality definition. Fig. 10 shows the proton distribution in the phase space of transverse momentum (pT ) and rapidity (y) for Au+Au collisions at  =19.6 GeV in the UrQMD model. The protons used in the moment analysis are distributed in the oblong box (0.4 < pT < 0.8 GeV/c, |y| < 0.5). The solid black curve represents (pT , y) points with η = 2. If all the charged particles within the η = 2 curve are used to define the centrality, it will definitely introduce the auto-correlation effects.
FIG. 8. (Color online) The centrality dependence of the moments products Sσ of net-proton multiplicity distributions for Au+Au collisions at  =7.7, 11.5, 19.6, 27, 39, 62.4, 200 GeV in UrQMD model. The open circle and square are the results with CBWC and without CBWC at |η| < 0.5 for centrality definition, respectively. The solid circle and square are the results with CBWC and without CBWC at |η| < 2 for centrality definition, respectively.
Figure 11 and 12 show the centrality dependence of the moment products Sσ and κσ2 of netproton distributions with different centrality definition, respectively. The difference between the results from the two types of centrality definition is larger in low energies than high energies. This is because the number of protons commonly used in the moments analysis and the centrality definition are larger in low energies than high energies. The auto-correlation effect will lead to the suppressing of the value of the moment products Sσ and κσ2. Thus, to avoid the autocorrelation effect, we should exclude the corresponding proton/anti-protons from the centrality definition.
7.	Summary
We presented three measurement artifacts in the moment analysis of net-proton distributions in heavy-ion collisions. Those issues could be commonly encountered in any moment analysis of multiplicity distributions in heavy-ion collisions. Those are centrality bin width effect, centrality resolution effect and auto-correlation effect. We also discussed corresponding methods to address those effects to obtain physics information. The studies were done using events from UrQMD model and the calculations are carried out for Au+Au collisions at  = 7.7, 11.5, 19.6, 27, 39, 62.4, 200 GeV. The centrality bin width effect and centrality resolution effect are originated from the system volume and its fluctuations. The auto-correlation effect is resulted from using the same particles for the moment analysis and for the centrality definitions. We have also discussed the statistical error estimation method used in moments analysis. The effects and techniques discussed in this paper are not only restricted within the net-proton moment analysis, but also applicable to other moment analysis in heavy-ion collisions, such as net-charge, netstrangeness. This will provide a reference on how to perform model calculation with similar
 
 
FIG. 9. (Color online) The centrality dependence of the moment products κσ2 of net-proton multiplicity distributions for Au+Au collisions at  =7.7, 11.5, 19.6, 27, 39, 62.4, 200 GeV in UrQMD model. The open circle and square are the results with CBWC and without CBWC at |η| < 0.5 for centrality definition. The solid circle and square are the results with CBWC and without CBWC at |η| < 2 for centrality definition.
 
FIG. 10. (Color online) The proton distribution in the phase space of transverse momentum (pT GeV/c) and rapidity (y) for Au+Au collisions at  =19.6 GeV using the UrQMD model.
The relation between pT and 1, where the m0 is the particle rest mass.
 
FIG. 11. (Color online) The centrality dependence of the moments products Sσ of net-proton multiplicity distributions for Au+Au collisions at  =7.7, 11.5, 19.6, 27, 39, 62.4, 200 GeV in UrQMD model with two type of centrality definition.
 
FIG. 12. (Color online) The centrality dependence of the moments products κσ2 of net-proton multiplicity distributions for Au+Au collisions at  =7.7, 11.5, 19.6, 27, 39, 62.4, 200 GeV in UrQMD model with two type of centrality definition.
analysis techniques for comparison with the experimental results.
Acknowledgement
The work was supported in part by the National Natural Science Foundation of China under grant No. 11205067 and 11135011. CCNU-QLPL Innovation Fund(QLPL2011P01, QLPL2013P01) and China Postdoctoral Science Foundation (2012M511237). BM is supported by the DST SwarnaJayanti project fellowship.
References
[1]	M. M. Aggarwal et al. (STAR Collaboration), arXiv: 1007.2613.
[2]	Y. Aoki et al., Nature 443 675 (2006).
[3]	S. Ejiri, Phys. Rev. D 78 (2008) 074507 ; E. S. Bowman, J. I. Kapusta, Phys. Rev. C 79 (2009) 015202.
[4]	R. V. Gavai, S. Gupta, Phys. Rev. D 78, 114503 (2008).
[5]	M. A. Stephanov, Int. J. Mod. Phys. A 20, 4387 (2005); B. Mohanty, Nucl. Phys. A 830, 899c (2009).
[6]	Z. Fodor, S. D. Katz, Phys. Lett. B 534 (2002) 87; Philippe de Forcrand and O. Philipsen, Nucl. Phys. B 642 (2002) 290; R. V. Gavai, S. Gupta, Phys. Rev. D 68 (2003) 034506.
[7]	M. A. Stephanov, Phys. Rev. Lett. 102, 032301 (2009).
[8]	M. Cheng et al., Phys. Rev. D 79, 074505 (2009). A. Bazavov, et al., arXiv:1203.0784. [9] S. Borsanyi et al., JHEP 1201, 138 (2011).
[10]	F. Karsch and K. Redlich, Phys. Lett. B 695, 136 (2011).
[11]	S. Gupta, X. Luo, B. Mohanty, H. G. Ritter, N. Xu, Science 332, 1525 (2011).
[12]	X. Luo (for the STAR Collaboration), Nucl. Phys. A 904, 911c (2013).
[13]	M. Bleicher et al., J. Phys. G: Nucl. Part. Phys. 25, 1859 (1999).
[14]	M. M. Aggarwal et al. (STAR Collaboration), Phys. Rev. Lett. 105, 022302 (2010).
[15]	X. Luo (for the STAR Collaboration), J. Phys.: Conf. Ser. 316, 012003 (2011).
[16]	X. Luo (for the STAR Collaboration), Acta Phys. Pol. B Proc. Supp.5, 497 (2012). [arXiv:1111.5671].
[17]	B. Efron,R. Tibshirani, An introduction to the bootstrap, Chapman & Hall (1993).
[18]	X. Luo, J. Phys. G: Nucl. Part. Phys. 39, 025008 (2012).
[19]	Michael L. Miller et al., Ann. Rev. Nucl. Part. Sci. 57, 205 (2007). [20] V. Skokov et al., arXiv: 1205.4756.
Baseline study for higher moments of net–charge distributions at RHIC energies
Nihar R. Sahoo, Sudipan De and Tapan K. Nayak
Variable Energy Cyclotron Center, Kolkata - 700064, India
Lattice QCD models predict the presence of a critical point in the QCD phase diagram where the first order phase transition between the hadron gas and Quark-Gluon Plasma ceases to exist. Higher moments of conserved quantities, such as net–charge, net–baryon number and net–strangeness, are proposed to be sensitive probes for locating the critical point. The moments of net–charge distributions have been studied as a function of centrality for Au+Au collisions at  to 200 GeV using three event generators, viz., UrQMD, HIJING, and THERMINATOR-2. The effect of centrality selection, resonance production, as well as contributions from particle species to the net–charge moments and their products have been studied. It is observed that mean of the net–charge distributions are dominated by net–protons, whereas standard deviation, skewness and kurtosis closely follow net–pion distributions. These results, along with the predictions from Hadron
 
Resonance Gas (HRG) model, are presented.
PACS numbers: 25.75.-q,25.75.Gz,25.75.Nq,12.38.Mh
	I.	INTRODUCTION
Statistical QCD (Quantum Chromodynamics) calculations predict that at high temperature and/or energy density, a system of strongly interacting particles, consisting of quarks and gluons, is formed where the particles would interact fairly weakly due to asymptotic freedom. Such a phase consisting of (almost) free quarks and gluons is termed as the
Quark Gluon Plasma (QGP). Experimentally the QGP can be produced by colliding heavy nuclei at ultra-relativistic energies, thus creating a region of enormous energy density. Understanding the nature of phase transition from normal hadronic matter to QGP has been a topic of tremendous interest over last decades, both in terms of theoretical studies and large scale experiments. The Relativistic Heavy-Ion Collider (RHIC) at Brookhaven National Laboratory has been the major facility for the search and study of QGP and to explore the QCD phase transition. Theoretical models, based on lattice QCD, reveal that at vanishing µB, the transition from QGP to hadron gas is a simple crossover [1], whereas at large µB, the phase transition is of first order [1– 8]. Therefore, one expects the existence of a critical point at the end of the first order transition. Locating the QCD critical point has been one of the major thrusts of the physics program at RHIC. The collider is capable of accelerating and colliding beams from top energy at  = 200 GeV, down to as low as
 = 7.7 GeV. Taking advantage of this, a beam energy scan program has been undertaken to exploit wide region of phase diagram and to search for the possible location of the QCD critical point [9–13].
One of the most plausible signatures of the critical point has been predicted to be the large event-byevent fluctuations of thermodynamic quantities measured in high energy heavy–ion collisions [14]. This is because of the fact that the thermodynamic susceptibilities (χ) and the correlation length (ξ) of the system diverge at the critical point [4, 7, 15]. Various QCD inspired models predict that higher moments of conserved quantities, such as distributions of net–charge, net–baryon and the net–strangeness are associated with the higher order thermodynamic susceptibilities and exhibit strong dependence on the correlation strength. This makes the moments, such as, mean (M), standard deviation (σ), skewness (S) and kurtosis (κ), etc., sensitive probes of the location of the critical point. These moments are related to the correlation length by σ2 ∼ ξ2, S ∼ ξ4.5 and κ ∼ ξ7 [7, 15]. In order to cancel the volume term in the susceptibilities, different combinations of the moments are constructed, such as, Sσ = χ(3)/χ(2) and κσ2 = χ(4)/χ(2), which can be used to have direct comparison of experimental results to lattice calculations. Thus at the critical point, one would expect large non-monotonic behavior in these products. Recent lattice QCD model estimations [16] have proposed the extraction of freeze-out parameters of the collision from the analysis of higher moments of net–charge distribution.
Among all conserved quantities, experimentally it is advantageous to study net–charge distributions. The fluctuations of net–charge include effects from net–baryon and net–strangeness. Net-charges take into account all the charged particles produced in the collisions, and thus can be directly compared with theoretical calculations [17–19]. Analytical calculations [20] also suggest that the net–charge higher moment analysis may be less affected by acceptance effects. To understand various physics processes which contribute to the moments of net–charge distributions, three different models have been used, such as, a QCD based model (HIJING [21]), a transport model (UrQMD [22]) and a thermal model, THERMINATOR-2 [23]. The results of these event generators are compared to those of the Hadron Resonance Gas (HRG) [24] model predictions. Because of the absence of any critical phenomenon in these models, they set a baseline for the measurements at the Relativistic Heavy-Ion Collider (RHIC). Rest of the article is organized as follows. Various moments of the net–charge distributions are introduced in Section II. Importance of centrality selection and centrality bin width correction are presented in Section III. In section IV, contributions of different particle species on the net–charge moments have been discussion, and in section V, effect of resonance decays are studied. In section VI, the products of moments from different event generators are presented and compared to that of the HRG model. Finally, we conclude with a summary.
II.	MOMENTS OF NET–CHARGE DISTRIBUTIONS
Experimentally, both the positive (N+) and negative (N−) charged particles are measured in a finite acceptance on an event-by-event basis. Net–charge (N) is defined as the difference between the number positive and negative charged particles, N = N+ − N−. For a given distribution of N, the first four moments can be expressed as:
Mean : variance :	M2 == hh(NδNi, )2i, σ
	skewness :	 ,
	and,	kurtosis :	 
where δN = N − hNi. The mean, variance, skewness and kurtosis are measures of the most probable value, width, asymmetry and the peakedness of the distributions, respectively.
The net–charge distributions in a heavy-ion collision are sensitive to the collision centrality, which is normally expressed in terms of impact parameter (b) or the number of participating nucleons (Npart). A given centrality class corresponds to certain percentage of total geometrical cross section of the collision, and represented by hNparti.
In this study, UrQMD event generator is used to study the beam energy and collision centrality dependence of net–charge distributions for Au+Au collisions. Charged particles within a pseudo-rapidity range of |η| < 0.5 and transverse momentum range of 0.2 < pT < 2.0 GeV/c are considered. Figure 1(a) shows the net–charge distributions for top central (0-5% of total cross section) collisions for four
netQ3
Entries  922596
+
FIG. 1: (Color online). The net–charge distributions obtained from UrQMD for Au+Au collisions: (a) for central collisions at  =7.7, 19.6, 39 and 200 GeV, and (b) for three centralities (0-5%, 30-40% and 60-70% of total cross section) at  =39 GeV.
center-of-mass energies. It has been observed that the mean of the distributions is close to zero for high energy collisions and shifts towards positive values for lower energies. The distributions are seen to be wider for higher energy collisions compared to those of the lower energies. Figure 1(b) shows net–charge distributions for three different centrality classes for Au+Au collisions at √sNN=39 GeV. It is seen that from peripheral to central collisions, the mean as well as the width of the distributions increase.
III.	CENTRALITY BIN WIDTH EFFECT ON HIGHER MOMENTS
A given centrality class is a collection of events having a range of impact parameters or Npart, thus comprising of events with different charged particle multiplicities. This results in additional fluctuations in the number of produced particles within each centrality class. Below we discuss the effect of finite bin
 
FIG. 2: (Color online). Centrality dependence of (a) mean, (b) standard deviation, (c) skewness, and (d) kurtosis, obtained for Au+Au collisions at  =39 GeV. The results using three centrality bins (2.5%, 5% and 10%), without and with the centrality bin width corrections are shown in upper and lower panels, respectively.
width of a given centrality class on the moments of distributions and prescribe a method in order to correct for this.
Figure 2 shows the centrality dependence of mean, sigma, skewness and kurtosis of net–charge distributions for Au+Au collisions at √sNN=39 GeV, obtained using UrQMD. Centrality classes were chosen using three different centrality bin widths, viz., 2.5%, 5% and 10% of cross section. From Fig. 2(a), it is observed that mean and sigma of the net–charge distributions are close to each other for all three centrality classes, whereas deviations are observed for skewness and kurtosis. This deviation is the result of choosing centrality class with a large bin.
The effect due to the finite centrality bin can be reduced by choosing smaller bins. In some cases, be-
 
FIG. 3: Beam energy dependence of (a) mean, (b) standard deviation, (c) skewness, and (d) kurtosis of net– charge distributions, obtained for central (0-5% centrality bin) Au+Au collisions.
cause of practical reasons such as resolution of centrality determination, statistics of available events, it is not possible to choose fine bins. In this case, a centrality bin width weighting method [25] can be used to minimize the effect. For this, net–charge distributions are constructed for finer bins in centrality within a centrality class. For moments of the distributions are obtained for each fine bin and weighted to get the final moments, according to:
	 ,	(2)
where X represents a given moment, the index i runs over each fine centrality bin, ni is the number of events in the ith bin, and Pi ni is the total number of events in the given centrality class. Figure 2(b) shows the moments of net–charge distributions in each centrality class after recalculating with appropriate weighting using centrality bin width method. After this correction, no centrality bin width dependence is observed in the three centrality classes. Thus the correction method does an appropriate job in correcting for the finite centrality bin width. For the rest of the article, results will be presented after taking into account correction for finite centrality bin width.
The beam energy dependence of mean, standard deviation, skewness and kurtosis of net–charge distributions are presented in Fig. 3 for central (top 5% of total cross section) Au+Au collisions. The statistical errors are estimated using the Delta theorem [26]. With the increase of center-of-mass energy from 7.7 to 200 GeV, the mean of the distributions decrease, whereas standard deviation has a considerable increase. The skewness decreases with increas-
 
FIG. 4: Centrality dependence of (a) mean, (b) standard deviation, (c) skewness, and (d) kurtosis for net– charge, net–pion, net–kaon and net-proton distributions in case of Au+Au collisions at  =39 GeV.
ing beam energy, whereas kurtosis shows negligible beam energy dependence.
IV.	EFFECT OF PARTICLE SPECIES ON HIGHER MOMENTS
Although we mainly focus on moments of inclusive charged particles, it is important to obtain the effect of each particle species which on the total net–charge distributions. These species mostly comprise of π+, π−, K+, K−, p, and ¯p, so the effect of net–pion, net– kaon and net–proton distributions on the net–charge distributions needs to be studied. At the generator level, the knowledge of the identity of each particle makes it possible to perform this study.
The centrality dependence of the contributions from different particle species to the moments of net–charge distributions have been studied using UrQMD for Au+Au collisions at  =39 GeV. Inclusive charged particles as well as identified particles are selected in the same pseudo-rapidity (|η| < 0.5) window and same transverse momentum ranges (0.2 < pT < 2.0 GeV/c). Figure 4 shows the mean, standard deviation, skewness and kurtosis for net– charge, net–pion, net–proton and net–kaon distributions as a function of centrality. It is observed that the effect of particle species on the net–charge distributions are significant, and different species affect the moments in a different manner. The mean of the net–charge distributions are dominated by the effect of net–protons. The mean of the net–pion distributions, on the other hand, are seen to decrease going from peripheral to central collisions, whereas the trend is opposite for the other three cases. The mean
 
FIG. 5: Centrality dependence of (a) Sσ and (b) κσ2 for net–charge, net–pion, net–kaon, and net–proton distributions in case of Au+Au collisions at  =39 GeV.
 
FIG. 6: Beam energy dependence of (a) Sσ and (b) κσ2 for net–charge, net–pion, net–kaon, net–proton distributions in case of central Au+Au collisions.
for net–pions shift to negative values for central collisions. The trend for the mean of net-kaons is similar to those of net–charges. The widths of net–charge distributions are close to those of the net–pions. The widths of net–kaons and net–protons are close to each other, but the values are smaller than those of net–charges. The skewness of the net–charge distributions are close to those of the net–pions, whereas net–kaon values are not so far. On the other hand, the skewness for net–proton distributions are much larger compared to net–charges and has a significant centrality dependence. This may be because of the difference in the number of protons and anti-protons produced in different centrality classes at this energy. The kurtosis of net–charge distributions are close to those of net–pions, and smaller than those of the for net–kaons and net–protons.
As the products of moments (such as Sσ and κσ2) can directly be compared to lattice calculations, we have studied their centrality dependence in Fig 5 as a function of centrality for Au+Au collisions at √sNN=39 GeV. It is observed that the Sσ values do not show centrality dependence at this energy. Sσ for net–charges are close to those of the net–kaons, whereas Sσ for net–pions are close to zero. These values for net–protons are much larger compared to net–charges. The κσ2 values for net– charges are close to those of the net-pions, and show strong centrality dependence. For net–kaons and net–protons, these values remain close to unity.
The beam energy dependence of Sσ and κσ2 for top central Au+Au collisions, obtained using UrQMD, has been presented in Fig. 6, where the upper and lower panels show the results for Sσ and κσ2, respectively. It is observed that Sσ for net– pions are close to zero at all energies, whereas a decreasing trend with increase of energy is observed for all other cases. For net–charges, Sσ values get close to zero at higher energies. The energy dependence of net–proton is quite prominent with much larger Sσ values. The values of κσ2for net–charge are close to those of net–pions, and show increasing trend with increase of beam energy. For net–proton and net–kaon distributions, κσ2are close to unity at all energies.
V.	RESONANCE EFFECTS ON HIGHER MOMENTS
The production of charged particles and net– charge distributions in proton-proton and heavy-ion collisions are affected by resonance decays. This can be studied by an event generator where one can track each of the particles in order to know its origin and history of the decay. THERMINATOR-2 offers such possibility for Au+Au collisions at √sNN=200 GeV, where decays of resonances, such as, Ξ, ∆++, ρ, φ and ω, and their anti-particles, can be turned on and off. Net–charge distributions have been made with resonance decays turned on and off, and the effects on the products of moments are studied. Figure 7 shows the results for Sσ and κσ2 as a function centrality. Sσ shows no centrality dependence, and the values with resonance decay turned on are closer to zero compared to those without the decay. Values of κσ2 without resonance decay are higher compared to those with the decay at all centralities. The reason for this could be the presence of double charged baryons, like ∆++, which may affect the
 
FIG. 7: (Color online). Centrality dependence of (a) Sσ and (b) κσ2 for net–charge distributions, with and without resonance decays, obtained using THERMINATOR-
2 [23].
net–charge distributions, and enhance the higher order moments [30].
VI.	COMPARISON OF MODEL PREDICTIONS
The net-charge distributions are sensitive to the particle production mechanisms. HIJING treats the heavy-ion collisions as a superposition of nucleonnucleon collisions. It is well suited to study the effects of jets and mini-jets on produced particles. UrQMD is a hadronic transport model including strings. It has been used successfully to describe the stopping power and hadronic re-scattering along with various hadronic resonances. The Lund string model is used for the particle production both in the HIJING and UrQMD models. On the other hand, THERMINATOR-2 gives a good description for the thermal model of particle production. The moments and their products for the net-charge distributions are analyzed for the three event generators for Au+Au collisions at  =200 GeV. Figure 8 shows the mean, standard deviation, skewness and kurtosis as a function of centrality. Although the trends of all the distributions are similar, there are some differences in terms of magnitudes. The M and σ increase from peripheral to central collisions for all three models, whereas S and κ values decrease with increase in collision centrality. The values of M are lower in THERMINATOR-2 as compared to HIJING and UrQMD, but the standard deviations are similar in all three cases. The centrality dependence
 
FIG. 8: (Color online). Centrality dependence of (a) Mean, (b) standard deviation, (c) skewness and (d) kurtosis for net–charge distributions in case of Au+Au collisions at  =200 GeV using HIJING, UrQMD and THERMINATOR-2. Dashed lines give results using central limit theorem.
of S and κ for THERMINATOR-2 are also weaker as compared to the other two cases.
The centrality evolution of the higher moments can be better understood by invoking the Central Limit Theorem (CLT) [28, 29], which gives the dependence of the moments on the number of participating nucleons:
σ	∝	qhNparti,
S	∝	1
  , phNparti
	M	∝	hNparti,
	and .	(3)
The centrality evolution of the moments, as shown by different lines in Fig. 8, follow the trend of the CLT for all the three event generators.
Combinations of the moments, such as M/σ2, Sσ and κσ2, have been constructed for central (0-5% of cross section) Au+Au collisions at  =7.7 to 200 GeV using the three event generators. These are shown Fig. 9, along with the predictions from the HRG model calculations. It is observed that M/σ2 and Sσ decreases with increasing colliding energy in all cases. The results from the three event generators are close together and HRG gives higher values. The values of κσ2 from HRG model is seen remain constant close to 2, whereas variations are seen for the event generators. The consideration of double charged baryons in HRG model is probably responsible for κσ2 to be close to 2. HIJING and UrQMD values are close to unity at low energy, after which these steadily increase as a function of en-
 
FIG. 9: (Color online). Beam energy dependence of (a) M/σ2, (b) Sσ and (c) κσ2 of net–charge distributions for central (0-5%) collisions, obtained from HIJING, UrQMD, and THERMINATOR-2. The predictions from the HRG model are superimposed.
ergy. THERMINATOR-2 is available only at 
= 200 GeV, and the value is close to unity. At this energy, the models with thermal equilibrium (HRG and THERMINATOR-2) have produced lower values of κσ2compared to HIJING and UrQMD.
	VII.	SUMMARY
Locating the QCD critical point is one of the major tasks in our understanding of the QCD phase diagram. Higher moments of net–charge distributions are proposed to provide one of the most sensitive probes towards the search for the critical point. The moments and their products have been studied at RHIC energies for Au+Au collisions within a range of √sNN=7.7 to 200 GeV using UrQMD, HIJING and THERMINATOR-2 event generators. The net– charge distributions are seen to be sensitive to the width of centrality class, and a centrality bin width correction is needed in order to take into account inherent fluctuations within the centrality class. The first four moments, viz., mean, sigma, skewness and kurtosis have been determined for all the energies at regular centrality intervals. For a given collision energy, the mean and sigma of the net-charge distributions increase in going from peripheral to central collisions, whereas the skewness and kurtosis have decreasing trends. For top central (0-5%) collisions, the mean values go down, whereas sigma values increase in going from low to high beam energy. With the increase of energy, the values skewness have a decreasing trend, and kurtosis values show negligible beam energy dependence. Net–charge distributions inherently contain the contributions from net– pion, net–proton and net–kaon. The effect of these particle species on the final net–charge moments have been studied using UrQMD. It is observed that mean of the net–charge is dominated by net–protons whereas standard deviation, skewness and kurtosis are affected more by the net-pion distributions. The resonance decay contributions to the net-charge distributions are studied by the THERMINATOR-2 model. The presence of double charged particles like, ∆++, might enhance the values of Sσ and κσ2. The various moments by the three event generators are compared for Au+Au collisions as a function of centrality for  =200 GeV, and are seen, in general, to follow CLT expectations. The products of the moments, M/σ2, Sσ and κσ2 for top (0-5%) central collisions, are studied for these three generators and predictions from the HRG model. At 
GeV, a clear difference is observed for κσ2 in case of thermal models like HRG and THERMINATOR-2, and other non-equilibrium models like HIJING and UrQMD. While these studies set the baseline for the measurements at RHIC, the much-awaited experimental data are needed in order to understand the particle production mechanisms and to probe the QCD critical point.
Acknowledgement
The authors would like to thank Bedangadas Mohanty, Xiaofeng Luo, Lizhu Chen, Prithwish Tribedy, Nu Xu, Frithjof Karsch, Swagato Mukherjee, Sourendu Gupta and Rajiv Gavai for their valuable suggestions during the preparation of the manuscript. We thank Panos Christakogloufor careful reading of the manuscript.
 
[1]	Y. Aoki et al., Nature 443, 675 (2006).
[2]	S. Ejiri, Phys. Rev. D 78, 074507 (2008). [3] E. S. Bowman and J. I. Kapusta, Phys. Rev. D 79, 015202 (2009).
[4]	M. A. Stephanov, Prog. Theor. Phys. Suppl. 153, 139 (2004); Int. J. Mod. Phys. A 20, 4387 (2005).
[5]	Z. Fodor et al., JHEP 0404, 50 (2004). [6] R. V. Gavai, S. Gupta, Phys. Rev. D 78, 114503
(2008).
[7] M. Cheng et al., arXiv:0811.1006 [hep-lat]. [8] B. Mohanty, J. Alam, S. Sarkar, T.K. Nayak and B.K. Nandi, Phys. Rev. C 68, 021901 (2003). [9] T. K. Nayak (for the STAR collaboration) (QM2009) Nucl. Phys. A 830, 555c (2009).
[10]	M. M. Aggarwal et al. (STAR Collaboration), Phys. Rev. Lett. 105, 022302 (2011).
[11]	D. McDonald for the STAR Collaboration, arXiv:1210.7023 [nucl-ex].
[12]	N. R. Sahoo for the STAR Collaboration, arXiv:1212.3892 [nucl-ex].
[13]	M. M. Aggarwal et al., arXiv:1007.2613 [nucl-ex].
[14]	M. A. Stephanov, K. Rajagopal and E. Shuryak, Phys. Rev. Lett. 81, 4815 (1998).
[15]	M.A. Stephanov, Phys. Rev. Lett. 102, 032301
(2009).
[16]	A. Bazavov et al., Phys.Rev.Lett. 109, 192302
(2012).
[17]	V. Skokov, B. Friman and K. Redlich, Phys. Lett.
B 708, 179 (2012).
[18]	M. Kitazawa and M. Asakawa, Phys. Rev. C 85,
021901 (2012).
[19]	A. Bzdak, V. Koch and V. Skokov, Phys. Rev. C 87, 014901 (2013).
[20]	A. Bzdak and V. Koch, Phys.Rev. C 86, 044904
(2012).
[21]	M. Gyulassy and Wang X N, 1994 Comput. Phys. Commun. 83 307; X. N. Wang and M. Gyulassy, Phys. Rev. D 44, 3501 (1991).
[22]	S. A. Bass et al., Prog. Part. Nucl. Phys. 41 255 (1998); M. Bleicher et al., J. Phys. G 25, 1859.
[23]	A. Kisiel et al., Comput. Phys. Commun. 174, 669 (2006); M. Chojnacki et al., Comput.Phys.Commun. 183, 746 (2012).
[24]	F. Karsch et al., Phys. Lett. B 695, (2011).
[25]	X.	Luo	(for	the	STAR	Collaboration), arXiv:1106.2926.
[26]	X. Luo, J. Phys. G: Nucl. Part. Phys. 39, 025008
(2012).
[27]	N. R. Sahoo (for the STAR Collaboration), arXiv:1101.5125 [nucl-ex].
[28]	X. F. Luo, B. Mohanty, H. G. Ritter and N. Xu, J.
Phys. G 37, 094061 (2010).
[29]	P. Tribedy et al., Phys. Rev. C 85, 024902 (2012).
[30]	P. Braun-Munzinger et al. Nucl. Phys. A 880, 48
(2012).
Commun. Theor. Phys. 62 (2014) 717–720	Vol. 62, No. 5, November 1, 2014
 
Isotopic Ratio, Isotonic Ratio, Isobaric Ratio and Shannon Information Uncertainty∗
	MA Chun-Wang (	)† and WEI Hui-Ling (	)
Institute of Particle and Nuclear Physics, Henan Normal University, Xinxiang 453007, China
(Received April 22, 2014; revised manuscript received August 13, 2014)
Abstract The isoscaling and the isobaric yield ratio difference (IBD) probes, both of which are constructed by yield ratio of fragment, provide cancelation of parameters. The information entropy theory is introduced to explain the physical meaning of the isoscaling and IBD probes. The similarity between the isoscaling and IBD results is found, i.e., the information uncertainty determined by the IBD method equals to β−α determined by the isoscaling (α (β) is the parameter fitted from the isotopic (isotonic) yield ratio).
PACS numbers: 25.70.Pq, 25.70.-z, 25.70.Mn, 89.70.Cf
Key words: Shannon information, isotopic ratio, isotonic ratio, isobaric ratio
 
1	Introduction
In heavy-ion collisions (HICs) above intermediate energy, nuclear matters from sub-saturation to suprasaturation densities can be produced, which makes HICs be a unique experimental method to study the abnormal nuclear matters on earth. The supra-saturation nuclear matter, which is produced in the compression of the overlapping zone of the projectile and target nuclei, can not be probed directly. The supra-saturation nuclear matters produced in HICs are related to dense nuclear matters in compact astronomical body like neutron star, which attracts much interest both theoretically and experimentally. On the theoretical side of studying the HICs, the descriptions of the compressing and expanding of the collisions, at the same time the decay of the hot fragments still face many challenges. On the experimental side, the whole processes of the reaction like a black-box, with only the emitted light particles and final residues are measurable. Most of the probes detecting the processes of HICs are based on the measurable light particles or final fragments.[1] But the final fragments carry only part information of the initial collisions since they undergo the decay process. Depending on the density and temperature, the nuclear symmetry energy is one of the important properties of nuclear matter. Since nuclear symmetry energy can not be measured directly, the many results of nuclear symmetry energy, which are extracted based on different indirect probes, are in conflict. Till now, the nuclear symmetry energy is still an open question in nuclear physics, and it is still important to find new probes to study the nuclear symmetry energy.[1−3]
The isoscaling method, which uses the isotopic or isotonic yield ratio, is one of the important methods to study the nuclear symmetry energy of the sub-saturation nuclear matter produced in HICs.[4−6] The isobaric ratio
 
methods, which use the isobaric yield ratios, have been proposed to study the nuclear symmetry energy of finite nuclei,[7−17] the chemical potential difference between neutrons and protons,[18−19] and the density difference between projectiles.[20] The volume effects manifested in the results[21] are found to be originated from the neutronskin of neutron-rich fragments.[22−23] Besides, the ratios of fragments are also used to detect the temperature of the reaction.[24−28] A systematic comparison between the results of the isoscaling and the isobaric yield ratio difference (IBD) methods proves that the results of isoscaling and IBD are similar.[18−19] In both the isoscaling and IBD methods, the yield ratios of fragments provide cancelations of special terms or parameters influencing the yield of fragment, which facilitates the study of nuclear symmetry energy.[11−13]
The Shannon information theory is a method to measure the uncertainty in a random variable, which quantifies the expected value of the information contained in a message, and can extract reliable information in the information transition from measured observable.[29−32] The Shannon information theory has many similarity compared to the black-box characteristics of the HICs processes. The ideas of Shannon information entropy has been introduced to study the hadron decaying branching process,[33] and probe the liquid-gas transition in the disassemble of the colliding system in HICs.[34] In this article, we will introduce the information entropy theory to understand the isoscaling and IBD probes.
2	Shannon Information Entropy Theory
In the Shannon information theory, considering a system which has multi events S = {e1,e2,...,en} with the corresponding probability {p1,p2,...,pn}, the information uncertainty of a certain event ei (or the information
 
∗Supported by National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant No. 10905017, Program for Science & Technology Innovation
Talents in Universities of Henan Province (13HASTIT046), and the Young Teacher Project in Henan Normal University †Corresponding author, E-mail: machunwang@126.com  c 2014 Chinese Physical Society and IOP Publishing Ltd
http://www.iop.org/EJ/journal/ctp http://ctp.itp.ac.cn
718	Communications in Theoretical Physics	Vol. 62
 
ei contained) is defined as,
	U(ei) = −lnpi ,	(1)
with U(ei) in units of nats.
If the probability of the event is non-uniform, the information entropy of the system can be defined as,[29,31,33−34]
n
	H(S) = −Xpilnpi .	(2)
i=1
The information entropy and information uncertainty can be used interchangeably.[31] In some applications, U(ei) is also named as information entropy of one event. To differ the concept of the previously defined information entropy in Refs. [33–34], U(ei) is called as the information uncertainty. In HICs, all the types of particles and fragments form a system. Each type of particle and fragment can be viewed as an independent event with different probability denoted by yield or cross section (σ). In the work of Ma, the liquid-gas transition is found in the information entropy of the system.[34] In this work, we concentrate on the information uncertainty of the final fragments, which is believed to carry part of the information of reactions.
3	Isotopic/Isotonic/Isobaric Ratio and Information Uncertainty
In the free energy based theories describing the HICs above the Fermi energy, the yield of a fragment follows the exponential function, which is mainly decided by the free energy, the chemical properties of the source, and temperature.[7,11,35−38] In the ratio of fragment yield, the cancelation of some terms makes it possible to study the retained terms in the exponential function, and specific physical parameters can be studied. Some probes based on yield ratios are proposed, for examples, the isotopic temperature probes[24−25] and the isobaric temperature probes,[26−28] the isoscaling probe for nuclear symmetry energy,[4−5] and the isobaric yield ratio difference probes for nuclear symmetry energy,[11,13,18−20] etc. We will explain the physical meaning of the result for the isoscaling and isobaric ratios using the information uncertainty theory.
Assuming the thermal equilibrium, in the grandcanonical ensembles theory within the grand-canonical limit, the yield of a fragment is given by,[37−38]
σ(A,I) = CAτ exp{[F(A,I) + µnN + µpZ]/T}, (3) where A and I = (N − Z) denote the mass and neutronexcess of the fragment; C depends on the reaction system; F(A,I) is free energy of the fragment, and µn (µp) denotes the chemical potential of the neutrons (protons). In the modified Fisher model, the yield of a fragment is described in a similar form by considering the entropy of exchanging the neutrons and protons.[11,35] The exponential law of the fragment yield makes it easy to explain the probes based on the fragment yield by using the information uncertainty theory since in Eq. (1) the logarithm operation of yield probability frees the parameters in the yields in Eq. (3).
3.1 Isotopic and Isotonic Ratios
For the isoscaling method, which uses the isotopic ratio and isotonic ratios, we denote a fragment with neutron numbers N and proton numbers Z as (N,Z) for convenience. From Eq. (3), which represents the residue probability for a fragment, the information uncertainty included in the fragment can be written as,
U(e) = −lnσ(N,Z), (4) with e denoting an event corresponding to the fragment (N,Z). In reactions of similar measurements, the temperatures of the specific fragment can be assumed as the same, thus the free energies of (N,Z) equal in the two reactions. The difference between the information uncertainty of fragment (N,Z) in the two reactions can be written as,
∆21U(e) = U2(e)−U1(e) = lnσ1(N,Z)−lnσ2(N,Z). (5)
Inserting Eq. (3) into Eq. (5), one obtains,
∆21U(e) = c1 − c2 + [F1(N,Z) − F2(N,Z)
+ N(µn1 − µn2) + Z(µp1 − µp2)]/T
= ∆c+[∆F12(N,Z)+N∆µn12+Z∆µp12]/T ,(6)
∆c = c1 − c2, with 1 and 2 are indexes denoting the reactions and the corresponding parameters. Defining α = ∆µn21/T = (µn2 − µn1)/T and β = ∆µp21/T =
(µp2 − µp1)/T, Eq. (6) can be written as,
∆21U(e) = ∆c − Nα − Zβ , (7) with α (β) being the fitting parameter from the isotopic (isotonic) ratio between reactions. For isotopic ratio, Zβ is a constant (labeled as Cz). From Eq. (7), the following can be obtained,
	∆21U(ep) = ∆c + Cz + N∆µn12/T .	(8)
Similarly, for isotonic ratios, Nα is a constant (labeled as Cn). From Eq. (7), the following can be obtained,
∆21U(en) = ∆c + Cn + Z∆µp12/T , (9) with ep and en denoting the isotopic and isotonic events. It is shown that ∆21U(en) depends on the reaction systems due to ∆c12. But only α and β are the interested parameters. For isotopic (isotonic) ratio, the Cz (Cn) is assumed to be a constant. This assumption can only be fulfilled when the nuclear density does not change.
One fragment belongs both to an isotopic chain and an isotonic chain. In the isoscaling analysis, the fragment is related to α in its isotopic ratio and to β in its isotonic ratio simultaneously. The difference between the information uncertainty included in a fragment from its isotopic ratio and isotonic ratio is,
∆12U(ep) − ∆12U(en) = Nα − Zβ + Cz − Cn = 0. (10)
No. 5	Communications in Theoretical Physics	719
If Cz = Cn can be fulfilled, one has,
	 .	(11)
This can only happen in the neutron-proton symmetric matter.
3.2 Isobaric Ratio
For isobaric ratio, the fragment will be denoted as (A,I). The information uncertainty difference between the isobars differing 2 in I can be written as,
∆U(eb)(I+2,I) = lnσ(A,I) − lnσ(A,I + 2), (12) where eb denotes the isobaric event. Inserting Eq. (3) into Eq. (12), the CAτ term cancels out and one obtains,
∆U(eb)(I+2,I) = [∆F(A,I,I + 2) − µn + µp]/T , (13) with ∆F(A,I,I + 2) = F(A,I) − F(A,I + 2). Assuming the temperatures of two reactions are the same, one can define the difference between the information uncertainty of isobars,
∆21U(eb)(I+2,I) = [∆21F(A,I,I + 2)
	− ∆µn21 + ∆µp21]/T ,	(14)
∆21F(A,I,I + 2) = 0 can be assumed, which results in the following equation,
∆21U(eb)(I+2,I) = (−∆µn21 + ∆µp21)/T = β − α,	(15)
∆µn21 (∆µn21) is the same as in Eq. (6), which denotes the difference between the chemical potential of neutrons (protons) of the two reactions. In Eq. (15), the correlation between the isobaric ratio difference and the isoscaling parameters α and β is explicated. This correlation has also been illustrated and verified experimentally.[18−19]
3.3 Discussion
Both the isoscaling and isobaric methods use the yields of fragments produced in two similar reactions. In the isoscaling and IBD methods, the free energies of the fragments cancel out in different manners by assuming the same temperatures of the reactions. In the isotopic (isotonic) ratios, the constant ∆12c in Eqs. (8) and (9) makes the difference between the information uncertainty of the isotopic (isotonic) ratios depends on the reaction system, but it is unimportant in the isoscaling analysis since it only cares for α and β. In the isobaric ratio, the cancelation of CAτ makes it convenient to compare the fragment yield in reactions besides those induced by isotopic projectiles or on isotopic targets.[13,18−19] In the real reactions, the yield of fragment sometimes does not obey the isoscaling, in which case the isoscaling analysis encounters difficulties. The isobaric ratio, which uses only two or three isobars, does not require regular distributions of fragments as in the isoscaling method.
When comparing the information uncertainty included in the isoscaling and IBD probes, it should also be pointed out that the IBD results are obtained directly from the fragment ratio, while the isoscaling results are obtained indirectly since α and β are the fitting parameters from the isotopic or isotonic ratio. From the information theory, the IBD probe has advantages compared with isoscaling, and it should be more sensitive to the change of the reactions.
4	Summary
The information entropy theory is introduced to explain the isoscaling and IBD probes. The physical meanings of the isoscaling and IBD probes, which both use fragment ratio to make cancelation of parameters, are explained in the information uncertainty manner. The similarity between the isoscaling and IBD results is found, i.e., the information uncertainty determined by the IBD method equals to the value of β − α. The IBD probe is shown to have advantage to the isoscaling method both in experiment and theoretical analysis, which could also be used when the fragment does not obey the isoscaling.
Acknowledgments
We thank Prof. Ma Yugang, at Shanghai Institute of Applied Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, for the useful discussion of the information entropy theory.
 
References
[1]	B.A. Li, L.W. Chen, and C.M. Ko, Phys. Rep. 464 (2008)
113.
[2]	L.W. Chen, et al., Front. Phys. China 2 (2007) 327.
[3]	J.B. Natowitz, G. R¨opke, S. Typel, et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 104 (2010) 252501.
[4]	M. Huang, Z. Chen, S. Kowalski, et al., Nucl. Phys. A 847 (2011) 233.
[5]	H.S. Xu, et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 85 (2000) 716.
[6]	Y.G. Ma, et al., Phys. Rev. C 69 (2004) 064610; Phys.
Rev. C 72 (2005) 064603.
[7]	M. Huang, A. Bonasera, Z. Chen, et al., Phys. Rev. C 81 (2011) 044618.
[8]	P. Marini, A. Bonasera, A. McIntosh, et al., Phys. Rev. C 85 (2012) 034617.
[9]	W. Lin, R. Wada, M. Huang, X. Liu, M. Zhao, and Z. Chen, Nucl. Sci. Tech. 24 (2013) 050511.
[10]	R. Wada, M. Huang, W. Lin, X. Liu, M. Zhao, and Z. Chen, Nucl. Sci. Tech. 24 (2013) 050501.
[11]	M. Huang, Z. Chen, S. Kowalski, et al., Phys. Rev. C 81 (2010) 044620.
[12]	C.W. Ma, F. Wang, Y.G. Ma, and C. Jin, Phys. Rev. C 83 (2011) 064620.
720	Communications in Theoretical Physics	Vol. 62
[13]	C.W. Ma, J. Pu, H.L. Wei, S.S. Wang, H.L. Song, S. Zhang, and L. Chen, Eur. Phys. J. A 48 (2012) 78.
[14]	C.W. Ma, J. Pu, S.S. Wang, and H.L. Wei, Chin. Phys. Lett. 29 (2012) 062101.
[15]	C.W. Ma, H.L. Song, J. Pu, et al., Chin. Phys. C 37
(2013) 024102.
[16]	C.W. Ma, S.S. Wang, Y.L. Zhang, and H.L. Wei, arXiv:1402.5493 [nucl-th].
[17]	J. Pu, et al., Nucl. Phys. Rev. 29 (2012) 129 (in Chinese).
[18]	C.W. Ma, S.S. Wang, Y.L. Zhang, and H.L. Wei, Phys. Rev. C 87 (2013) 034618.
[19]	C.W. Ma, S.S. Wang, Y.L. Zhang, and H.L. Wei, J. Phys. G: Nucl. Part. Phys. 40 (2013) 125106.
[20]	C.W. Ma, J. Yu, X.M. Bai, Y.L. Zhang, H.L. Wei, and S.S. Wang, Phys. Rev. C 89 (2014) 057602.
[21]	S.R. Souza and M.B. Tsang, Phys. Rev. C 85 (2012)
024603.
[22]	C.W. Ma, S.S. Wang, H.L. Wei, and Y.G. Ma, Chin. Phys. Lett. 30 (2013) 052101.
[23]	C.W. Ma, H.L. Wei, and Y.G. Ma, Phys. Rev. C 88 (2013) 044612.
[24]	S. Albergo, et al., Nuovo Cimento A 89 (1985) 1.
[25]	C.W. Ma, et al., Commun. Theor. Phys. 59 (2013) 95.
[26]	C.W. Ma, J. Pu, Y.G. Ma, R. Wada, and S.S. Wang, Phys. Rev. C 86 (2012) 054611.
[27]	C.W. Ma, X.L. Zhao, J. Pu, et al., Phys. Rev. C 88 (2013) 014609.
[28]	C.W. Ma, C.Y. Qiao, S.S. Wang, F.M. Lu, L. Chen, and M.T. Guo, Nucl. Sci. Tech. 24 (2013) 050510.
[29]	C.E. Shannon, Bell System Technical Journal 27 (1948) 379.
[30]	G. Francois and O. Stefano, Entropy Methods for the Boltzmann Equation: Lectures from a Special Semester at the Centre ´emile Borel, Institut H. Poincar´e,
Paris, Springer (2001) p. 14; ISBN 978-3-540-73704-9.
(doi:10.1007/978-3-540-73705-6)
[31]	E.T. Jaynes, Phys. Rev. 106 (1957) 620.
[32]	K.G. Denbigh and J.S. Denbigh, Entropy in Relation to Uncomplete Knowledge, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge (1985).
[33]	P. Brogueira, J. Dias de Deus, and I.P. da Silva, Phys. Rev. D 53 (1996) 5283; Z. Cao and Rudolph C. Hwa, Phys. Rev. D 53 (1996) 6608.
[34]	Y.G. Ma, Phys. Rev. Lett. 83 (1999) 3617.
[35]	R.W. Minich, S. Agarwal, A. Bujak, et al., Phys. Lett. B 118 (1982) 458.
[36]	C. Karthikraj, N.S. Rajeswari, and M. Balasubramaniam, Phys. Rev. C 86 (2012) 014613.
[37]	M.B. Tsang, W.G. Lynch, and W.A. Friedman, et al., Phys. Rev. C 76 (2007) 041302(R).
[38]	C.B. Das, S. Das Gupta, X.D. Liu, and M.B. Tsang, Phys. Rev. C 64 (2001) 044608.
